0 the gambel's quail (callipepla gambelii) is a small ground-dwelling bird in the new world quail family .
1  it inhabits the desert regions of arizona , california , colorado , new mexico , nevada , utah , texas , and sonora; also new mexico-border chihuahua and the colorado river region of baja california .
2  the gambel's quail is named in honor of william gambel , a 19th-century naturalist and explorer of the southwestern united states .
3 descriptionthe callipepla gambelii birds are easily recognized by their top knots and scaly plumage on their undersides .
4  gambel's quail have bluish-gray plumage on much of their bodies , and males have copper feathers on the top of their heads , black faces , and white stripes above their eyes .
5  the bird's average length is 11 in (28 cm) with a wingspan of 1416 in (3641 cm) .
6  these birds have relatively short , rounded wings and long , featherless legs .
7  its diet consists primarily of plant matter and seeds .
8 gambel's quail can be commonly confused with california quail due to similar plumage .
9  they can usually be distinguished by range , but when this does not suffice , california quail have a more scaly appearance and the black patch on the lower breast of the male gambel's quail is absent in the california quail .
10  the two species are sister taxa which diverged during the late pliocene or early pleistocene , 1 to 2 mya.2taxonomysubspeciesthere are two recognized subspecies:3c .
11  g .
12  fulvipectus (nelson , 1899)  fulvous-breasted quail  southeast arizona and southwest new mexico to southern sonora in mexicoc .
13  g .
14  gambelii (gambell , 1843)  nominate  utah and nevada through mojave desert to colorado , northeastern baja california and tiburn island .
15 juvenile in arizonabehaviorgambel's quail primarily move about by walking and can move surprisingly fast through brush and undergrowth .
16  they are a non-migratory species and are rarely seen in flight .
17  any flight is usually short and explosive , with many rapid wingbeats , followed by a slow glide to the ground .
18  in the late summer , fall , and winter , the adults and immature young congregate into coveys of many birds .
19  in the spring , gambel's quail pair off for mating and become very aggressive toward other pairs .
20  the chicks are decidedly more insectivorous than adults , gradually consuming more plant matter as they mature .
21  gambel's quail are monogamous and rarely breed in colonies .
22  the female typically lays 1012 eggs in a simple scrape concealed in vegetation , often at the base of a rock or tree .
23  incubation lasts from 2123 days , usually performed by the female and rarely by the male .
