0 the ruby-throated hummingbird (archilochus colubris) is a species of hummingbird[a] that generally spends the winter in central america and migrates to eastern north america for the summer to breed .
1  it is by far the most common hummingbird seen east of the mississippi river in north america .
2 descriptionjuvenile male ruby-throated hummingbird hoveringthis hummingbird is from 7 to 9 cm (2.8 to 3.5 in) long and has an 8 to 11 cm (3.1 to 4.3 in) wingspan .
3  weight can range from 2 to 6 g (0.071 to 0.212 oz), with males averaging 3.4 g (0.12 oz) against the slightly larger female which averages 3.8 g (0.13 oz) .
4 [3][4] adults are metallic green above and greyish white below , with near-black wings .
5  their bill , at up to 2 cm (0.79 in), is long , straight , and very slender .
6  as in all hummingbirds , the toes and feet of this species are quite small , with a middle toe of around 0.6 cm (0.24 in) and a tarsus of approximately 0.4 cm (0.16 in) .
7  the ruby-throated hummingbird can only fox-trot if it wants to move along a branch , though it can scratch its head and neck with its feet .
8 [5][6]the species is sexually dimorphic .
9 [7] the adult male has a gorget (throat patch) of iridescent ruby red bordered narrowly with velvety black on the upper margin and a forked black tail with a faint violet sheen .
10  the red iridescence is highly directional and appears dull black from many angles .
11  the female has a notched tail with outer feathers banded in green , black , and white and a white throat that may be plain or lightly marked with dusky streaks or stipples .
12  males are smaller than females and have slightly shorter bills .
13  juvenile males resemble adult females , though usually with heavier throat markings .
14 [8] the plumage is molted once a year , beginning in late summer .
15 habitat , range and migrationfemale ruby-throated hummingbird , gadsden co .
16 , floridamale ruby-throated hummingbird on branchthe breeding habitat is throughout most of eastern north america and the canadian prairies , in deciduous and pine forests and forest edges , orchards , and gardens .
17  the female builds a nest in a protected location in a shrub or a tree .
18  of all hummingbirds in the united states , this species has the largest breeding range .
19 [5]the ruby-throated hummingbird is migratory , spending most of the winter in southern mexico and central america ,[9] as far south as extreme western panama ,[10] the west indies , and southern florida .
20  during migration , some birds embark on a nonstop 900 mile journey across the gulf of mexico and caribbean from panama to gulf coast .
21 [9] the bird breeds throughout the eastern united states , east of the 100th meridian , and in southern canada , particularly ontario , in eastern and mixed deciduous and broadleaved forest .
22 [11][12] in winter , it is seen mostly in mexico and southern florida .
23 behavior and metabolismruby-throated hummingbirds are solitary .
24  adults of this species are not social , other than during courtship (which lasts a few minutes); the female also cares for her offspring .
25  both males and females of any age are aggressive toward other hummingbirds .
26  they may defend territories , such as a feeding territory , attacking and chasing other hummingbirds that enter .
27 as part of their spring migration , portions of the population fly from the yucatan peninsula of mexico across the gulf of mexico , arriving first in florida and louisiana .
28 [9] this feat is impressive , as a 800 km (500 mi), non-stop flight over water would seemingly require a caloric energy that far exceeds an adult hummingbird's body weight of 3 g (0.11 oz) .
29 [9] however , researchers discovered the tiny birds can double their fat mass by approximately one gram in preparation for their gulf crossing , then expend the entire calorie reserve from fat during the 20-hour non-stop crossing when food and water are unavailable .
30 [9]hummingbirds have one of the highest metabolic rates of any animal , with heart rates up to 1260 beats per minute , breathing rate of about 250 breaths per minute even at rest , and oxygen consumption of about 4 ml oxygen/g/hour at rest .
31 [13] during flight , hummingbird oxygen consumption per gram of muscle tissue is approximately 10 times higher than that seen for elite human athletes .
32 [9]they feed frequently while active during the day .
33  when temperatures drop , particularly on cold nights , they may conserve energy by entering hypothermic torpor .
34 [9]flighthummingbirds have many skeletal and flight muscle adaptations which allow great agility in flight .
35  muscles make up 2530% of their body weight , and they have long , blade-like wings that , unlike the wings of other birds , connect to the body only from the shoulder joint .
36 [14] this adaptation allows the wing to rotate almost 180, enabling the bird to fly not only forward but backward , and to hover in mid-air , flight capabilities that are similar to insects and unique among birds .
37 [14] hummingbird hovering has been estimated to be 20% more efficient than performed by a helicopter drone .
38 [15]analysis of the main wing bone , the humerus , is thought to be specifically adapted for hovering flight .
39  hummingbirds have a relatively short humerus with proportionally massive deltoid-pectoral muscles which permit pronounced wing supination during upstroke when hovering .
40 [16]a hummingbird's ability to hover is due to its small mass , high wingbeat frequency and relatively large margin of mass-specific power available for flight .
41  several anatomical features contribute further , including proportionally massive major flight muscles (pectoralis major and supracoracoideus) and wing anatomy that enables the bird to leave its wings extended yet turned over (supine) during the upstroke .
42  this generates lift that supports body weight and maneuvering .
43 [17]hummingbirds achieve ability to support their weight and hover from wing beats creating lift on the downstroke of a wing flap and also on the upstroke in a ratio of 75%:25%, respectively , similarly to an insect .
44 [17][18] hummingbirds and insects gain lift during hovering partially through inversion of their cambered wings during an upstroke .
45 [18] during hovering , hummingbird wings beat up to 80 times per second .
46 [15]nectar from flowers and flowering trees , as well as small insects and spiders , are its main food .
47  although hummingbirds are well known to feed on nectar , small arthropods are an important source part of protein , minerals , and vitamins in the diet of adult hummingbirds .
48  hummingbirds show a slight preference for red , orange , and bright pink tubular flowers as nectar sources , though flowers not adapted to hummingbird pollination (e .
49 g .
50 , willow catkins) are also visited .
51 [10] their diet may also occasionally include sugar-rich tree sap taken from sapsucker wells .
52  the birds feed from flowers using a long , extendable tongue and catch insects on the wing or glean them from flowers , leaves , bark , and spiders' webs .
53 young birds are fed insects for protein since nectar is an insufficient source of protein for the growing birds .
54 [10]reproductionas typical for their family , ruby-throated hummingbirds are thought to be polygynous .
55  polyandry and polygynandry may also occur .
56  they do not form breeding pairs , with males departing immediately after the reproductive act and females providing all parental care .
57 [19]males arrive at the breeding area in the spring and establish a territory before the females arrive .
58  when the females return , males court females that enter their territory by performing courtship displays .
59  they perform a "dive display" rising 2.453.1 m (8.010.2 ft) above and 1.521.82 m (5.06.0 ft) to each side of the female .
60  if the female perches , the male begins flying in very rapid horizontal arcs less than 0.5 m (1.6 ft) in front of her .
61  if the female is receptive to the male , she may give a call and assume a solicitous posture with her tail feathers cocked and her wings drooped .
62 [citation needed]the nest is usually constructed on a small , downward-sloping tree limb 3.1 to 12.2 m (10 to 40 ft) feet above the ground .
63  favored trees are usually deciduous , such as oak , hornbeam , birch , poplar or hackberry , although pines have also been used .
64  nests have even been found on loops of chain , wire , and extension cords .
65 [5] the nest is composed of bud scales , with lichen on the exterior , bound with spider's silk , and lined with fibers such as plant down (often dandelion or thistle down) and animal hair .
66  most nests are well camouflaged .
67  old nests may be occupied for several seasons , but are repaired annually .
68 [10] as in all known hummingbird species , the female alone constructs the nest and cares for the eggs and young .
69 females lay two (with a range of 1 to 3) white eggs about 12.9 mm  8.5 mm (0.51 in  0.33 in) in size and produce one to two broods each summer .
70 [5] they brood the chicks over a period of 12 to 14 days , by which point they are feathered and homeothermic .
71  the female feeds the chicks from 1 to 3 times every hour by regurgitation , usually while the female continues hovering .
72  when they are 18 to 22 days old , the young leave the nest and make their first flight .
73 [10]longevity and mortalityfemale ruby-throated hummingbird taking various defensive and evasive actions around a man-made feeder .
74 the oldest known ruby-throated hummingbird to be banded was 9 years and 1 month of age .
75  almost all hummingbirds of 7 years or more in age are females , with males rarely surviving past 5 years of age .
76  reasons for higher mortality in males may include loss of weight during the breeding season due to the high energetic demands of defending a territory followed by energetically costly migration .
77 [9]a variety of animals prey on hummingbirds given the opportunity .
78  due to their small size , hummingbirds are vulnerable even to passerine birds and other animals which generally feed on insects .
79  on the other hand , only very swift predators can capture them and a free-flying adult hummingbird is too nimble for most predators .
80  chief among their predators are the smaller , swifter raptors like sharp-shinned hawks , merlins , american kestrels and mississippi kites as well as domestic cats , loggerhead shrikes and even greater roadrunners , all of which are likely to ambush the hummingbird while it sits or sleeps on a perch or are distracted by breeding activities .
81  predatory lizards and bird-eating snakes may also prey on the species , especially on its tropical wintering grounds .
82  even large , predacious invertebrates have preyed on ruby-throated hummingbirds , including praying mantises (which have been seen to ambush adult hummingbirds at hummingbird feeders on more than one occasion), orb-weaver spiders , and green darners .
83  blue jays are common predators of nests , as are several other corvids in addition to some icterids , bats , squirrels and chipmunks .
84 [20][21][22][23]vocalizationthe vocalizations of ruby-throated hummingbirds are rapid , squeaky chirps , which are used primarily for threats .
85  for example , males may vocalize to warn another male that has entered his territory .
86 during the courtship displays , the male makes a rapid tik-tik tik-tik tik-tik sound , apparently with his wings .
87  the sound is produced both during the shuttle display , at each end of the side-to-side flight .
88  also , the sound is made during dive displays .
89  a second , rather faint , repeated whining sound is sometimes produced with the outer tail-feathers during the dive , as the male flies over the female , spreading and shutting the tail as he does so .
