0 the common gallinule (gallinula galeata) is a bird in the family rallidae .
1  it was split from the common moorhen by the american ornithologists' union in july 2011.[2] it lives around well-vegetated marshes , ponds , canals , and other wetlands in the americas .
2  the species is not found in the polar regions or many tropical rainforests .
3  elsewhere , the common gallinule is likely the most commonly seen rail species in much of north america , excepting the american coot in some regions .
4 description and ecologythe gallinule has dark plumage apart from the white undertail , yellow legs and a red frontal shield .
5  the young are browner and lack the red shield .
6  it has a wide range of gargling calls and will emit loud hisses when threatened .
7 [3]this is a common breeding bird in marsh environments and well-vegetated lakes .
8  populations in areas where the waters freeze , such as southern canada and the northern usa , will migrate to more temperate climes .
9  this species will consume a wide variety of vegetable material and small aquatic creatures .
10  it forages beside or in the water , sometimes upending in the water to feed .
11  its wide feet allow it to hop about on lily pads .
12  it is often secretive , but can become tame in some areas .
13  despite loss of habitat in parts of its range , the common gallinule remains plentiful and widespread .
14 the common gallinule will fight to defend its territory .
15  the nest is a basket built on the ground in dense vegetation .
16  laying starts in spring , between mid-march and mid-may in northern hemisphere temperate regions .
17  about 8 eggs are usually laid per female early in the season; a brood later in the year usually has only 58 or even fewer eggs .
18  nests may be re-used by different females .
19  incubation lasts about three weeks .
20  both parents incubate and feed the young .
21  these fledge after 4050 days , become independent usually a few weeks thereafter , and may raise their first brood the next spring .
22  when threatened , the young may cling to a parent's body , after which the adult birds fly away to safety , carrying their offspring with them .
23 [3][4]this species is parasitized by the moorhen flea , dasypsyllus gallinulae .
24 [5]subspeciesseven subspecies are today considered valid; others have been described that are now considered junior synonyms .
25  most are not very readily recognizable , as differences are rather subtle and often clinal .
26  usually , the location of a sighting is the most reliable indication as to subspecies identification , but the migratory tendencies of this species make identifications based on location not completely reliable .
27 in addition to the extant subspecies listed below , there is a pleistocene population known from fossils: the larger , stout and long-winged paleosubspecies g .
28  g .
29  brodkorbi is known from the ichetucknee river deposits in florida .
30  it was originally described as a distinct species , but is probably the direct ancestor of some of today's common gallinules .
31  the presence in the same deposits of fossils typical of the shorter-winged and more delicate g .
32  g .
33  cerceris suggests that g .
34  g .
35  brodkorbi was not ancestral to the antillean (florida) gallinule of our time but rather to the more northerly north american subspecies .
