0 the cinnamon teal (anas cyanoptera) is a species of duck found in western north and south america .
1  it is a small dabbling duck , with bright reddish plumage on the male and duller brown plumage on the female .
2  it lives in marshes and ponds , and feeds mostly on plants .
3 descriptionfemale anas cyanoptera septentrionaliumfemale (front) and malethe adult male has a cinnamon-red head and body with a brown back , a red eye and a dark bill .
4  the adult female has a mottled brown body , a pale brown head , brown eyes and a grey bill and is very similar in appearance to a female blue-winged teal; however its overall color is richer , the lore spot , eye line , and eye ring are less distinct .
5  its bill is longer and more spatulate .
6  male juvenile resembles a female cinnamon or blue-winged teal but their eyes are red.23 they are 16 in (41 cm) long , have a 22-inch (560 mm) wingspan , and weigh 14 oz (400 g).3 they have 2 adult molts per year and a third molt in their first year.3distributiontheir breeding habitat is marshes and ponds in western united states and extreme southwestern canada , and are rare visitors to the east coast of the united states.3 cinnamon teal generally select new mates each year .
7  they are migratory and most winter in northern south america and the caribbean ,4 generally not migrating as far as the blue-winged teal .
8  some winter in california and southwestern arizona.2behaviorthese birds feed by dabbling .
9  they mainly eat plants; their diet may include molluscs and aquatic insects .
10 taxonomythe cinnamon teal is a member of the genus anas , the largest genus of dabbling ducks .
11 they are known to interbreed with blue-winged teals ,2 which are very close relatives .
12 subspecies are:anas cyanoptera septentrionalium (oberholser , 1906) northern cinnamon teal breeds from british columbia to northwestern new mexico , and they winter in northwestern south america.5anas cyanoptera tropica (snyder & lumsden , 1951) tropical cinnamon teal occurs in the cauca valley and magdalena valley in colombia.5anas cyanoptera borreroi (snyder & lumsden , 1951) borrero's cinnamon teal (possibly extinct) occurs in the eastern andes of colombia with records of apparently resident birds from northern ecuador.5 it is named for colombian ornithologist jos ignacio borrero .
