0 the black-chinned hummingbird (archilochus alexandri) is a small hummingbird .
1  it is an extremely adaptable bird , occupying a broad range of habitats .
2 [2]they are migratory and spend most of the winter in mexico .
3 taxonomya hybrid between this species and anna's hummingbird was called "trochilus" violajugulum .
4  the black-chinned hummingbird is also known to hybridize with costa's hummingbird .
5 as of 2011, it has the smallest known genome of all living amniotes , only 0.91 pg (910 million base pairs) .
6 [3]descriptionthe black-chinned hummingbird is 8.25 cm (3.25 in) long .
7  adults are metallic green above and white below with green flanks .
8  their bill is long , straight and very slender .
9  the adult male has a black face and chin , a glossy purple throat band and a dark forked tail .
10  the female has a dark rounded tail with white tips and no throat patch; they are similar to female ruby-throated hummingbirds .
11  juvenile plumage is similar to that of adult females , but with buff margins on the dorsal feathers .
12  juvenile males may also possess purple feathers on their throats .
13 [4]young are born almost featherless , but obtain a complete set of feathers within three weeks of hatching .
14  juveniles can begin replacing their plumage in november , and acquire their first basic plumage between april and may .
15  molts will then occur annually , taking 78 months at the population level .
16 [5]similar species to the black-chinned hummingbird include broad-tailed hummingbird , rufous hummingbird , calliope hummingbird , allen's hummingbird , lucifer hummingbird , anna's hummingbird , and costa's hummingbird .
17 [6]distribution and habitatblack-chinned hummingbirds are found in most of the western united states , reaching north into canada in alberta and british columbia , east to oklahoma , and as far south as mexico .
18 [2] they can be found in mountains , woodlands , orchards , meadows , and chaparral habitats .
19  their breeding habitat is open , semiarid areas , usually near water in the western united states , northern mexico , and southern british columbia .
20 behaviour and ecologythese birds feed on nectar from flowers using a long extendable tongue or catch insects on the wing .
21  while collecting nectar , they also assist in plant pollination .
22 the males and females of this species use different habitats from one another for breeding territories .
23 [7] black-chinned hummingbirds can exhibit territorial behavior around feeders as well as at other small feeding sites , and become more defensive as the breeding season continues .
24  however , if there are a large number of individuals in an area as well as multiple food sources , this species will exhibit very little territoriality .
25  unlike most passerines , the agonistic call of the black-chinned hummingbird is acoustically complex , with notes ordered in non-random patterns , and are even more complex than their songs .
26 [8] this species also uses diving displays (4060 ft (1218 m) dives) for territory defense as well as courtship , producing a variety of tones as air passes through their feathers during the plunge .
27 [9]the female builds a well-camouflaged nest in a protected location in a shrub or tree using plant fibre , spider webs and lichens .
28  black-chinned hummingbirds prefer to nest 612 ft (1.83.7 m) above the ground , often on exposed horizontal branches below the canopy .
29  research also suggests that they may purposefully nest near the active nests of much larger , predatory birds , as a means of reducing nest predation .
30  the larger predators are too large and slow to be interested in the hummingbird , but their presence will deter other birds that might be interested in the black-chinned hummingbird's eggs or newly hatched chicks .
31 [10] this species lays 2 small (8 mm (0.31 in) in width) white eggs at a time , incubating them for a period of 1216 days .
32 because of their small size , they are vulnerable to insect-eating birds and animals .
33 statusbecause of the black-chinned hummingbird's large range (236,000 km2 (91,000 sq mi)), large population size , and increasing trend in population (14.6% increase per decade), this species has been labeled as least concern .
34 [1] part of this increase is attributed to the increased popularity of hummingbird feeders and gardens .
