0 the dunlin (calidris alpina) is a small wader , sometimes separated with the other "stints" in erolia .
1  the english name is a dialect form of "dunling", first recorded in 15312. it derives from "dun", "dull brown ", with the -ling suffix meaning "concerned with" .
2 [2] the genus name is from ancient greek kalidris or skalidris , a term used by aristotle for some grey-coloured waterside birds .
3  the specific alpina is from latin and means "of high mountains", in this case referring to the alps .
4 [3]it is a circumpolar breeder in arctic or subarctic regions .
5  birds that breed in northern europe and asia are long-distance migrants , wintering south to africa , southeast asia and the middle east .
6  birds that breed in alaska and the canadian arctic migrate short distances to the pacific and atlantic coasts of north america , although those nesting in northern alaska overwinter in asia .
7  many dunlins winter along the iberian south coast .
8 behaviourthe dunlin is highly gregarious in winter , sometimes forming large flocks on coastal mudflats or sandy beaches .
9  large numbers can often be seen swirling in synchronized flight on stop-overs during migration or on their winter habitat .
10 this bird is one of the most common waders throughout its breeding and wintering ranges , and it is the species with which other waders tend to be compared .
11  at 1721 cm (6.78.3 in) length and with a 3236 cm (1314 in) wingspan , it is similar in size to a common starling , but stouter , with a thicker bill .
12 the dunlin moves along the coastal mudflat beaches it prefers with a characteristic "sewing machine" feeding action , methodically picking small food items .
13  insects form the main part of the dunlin's diet on the nesting grounds; it eats molluscs , worms and crustaceans in coastal areas .
14 on the east coast of englandfile:seasonal-variations-in-the-diet-and-foraging-behaviour-of-dunlins-calidris-alpina-in-a-south-pone.0081174.s001.ogvplay mediaforagingcalidris alpina .
15  ystad/sweden 2015.descriptionadult dunlin in winter plumage , sandy hook , new jersey , usa .
16 an adult dunlin in breeding plumage shows the distinctive black belly which no other similar-sized wader possesses .
17  the winter dunlin is basically grey above and white below .
18  juveniles are brown above with two whitish "v" shapes on the back .
19  they usually have black marks on the flanks or belly and show a strong white wingbar in flight .
20 the legs and slightly decurved bill are black .
21  there are a number of subspecies differing mainly in the extent of rufous colouration in the breeding plumage and the bill length .
22  bill length varies between sexes , the females having longer bills than the males .
