0 the sharp-shinned hawk (accipiter striatus) is a small hawk described from hispaniola , with males being the smallest hawks in the united states and canada , but with the species averaging larger than some neotropical species , such as tiny hawk .
1  the taxonomy is far from resolved , with some authorities considering the southern taxa to represent three separate species: white-breasted hawk (a .
2  chionogaster), plain-breasted hawk (a .
3  ventralis), and rufous-thighed hawk (a .
4  erythronemius) .
5 distributionthis species is widespread in north america , central america , south america and the greater antilles .
6  below , the distributions of the four groups (see taxonomy) are described as they occur roughly from north to south:the nominate (a .
7  s .
8  striatus) group is widespread in north america , occurring in all of the forested part of usa and canada , breeding in most of it .
9  populations in the northern part of the range migrate south and spend the non-breeding season (winter) in the southern usa , mexico and central america as far south as panama , with a smaller number spending the winter in the greater antilles .
10  resident populations exist in temperate parts of the usa , canada (in a few coastal regions), mexico (highlands from sonora to oaxaca), cuba , hispaniola and puerto rico .
11 a .
12  (s .
13 ) chionogaster (white-breasted hawk) occurs in highlands from far southern mexico (chiapas and oaxaca), through honduras , guatemala and el salvador , to nicaragua .
14  it is , as far as known , resident , but some local movements may occur .
15 a .
16  (s .
17 ) ventralis (plain-breasted hawk) occurs in the coastal mountains of northern venezuela and colombia , south through the andes from western venezuela , through colombia , ecuador and peru , to central bolivia .
18  a disjunct population occurs in the tepuis of southern venezuela (likely to extend into adjacent parts of roraima in far northern brazil , but this remains unconfirmed) .
19  it is , as far as known , resident , but some local movements may occur .
20 a .
21  (s .
22 ) erythronemius (rufous-thighed hawk) is widespread in eastern south america in eastern and southern brazil , uruguay , paraguay , north-eastern argentina and south-eastern bolivia .
23  it is , as far as known , resident in some regions and migratory in others .
24  the movements are generally poorly understood , but it only occurs seasonally at some localities in argentina .
25 taxonomywith a chick (nominate group)sharp-shinned hawk is often separated into four species , with the northern group (see distribution) retaining both the scientific name and the common name: sharp-shinned hawk (a .
26  striatus) .
27  in addition to the nominate taxon (a .
28  s .
29  striatus), it includes subspecies perobscurus , velox , suttoni , madrensis , fringilloides , and venator .
30  the three remaining taxa , each considered a monotypic species if split , are the white-breasted hawk (a .
31  chionogaster; kaup , 1852), plain-breasted hawk (a .
32  ventralis; sclater , 1866) and rufous-thighed hawk (a .
33  erythronemius; kaup , 1850) .
34  the breeding ranges of the groups are entirely allopatric , although the wintering range of the nominate group partially overlaps with the range of chionogaster (as is also the case with certain taxa within the nominate group) .
35  this allopatry combined with differences in plumage (see appearance) and , apparently , certain measurements , has been the background for the split , but hard scientific data are presently lacking (aou) .
36  disregarding field guides , most material published in recent years (e .
37 g .
38  aou , ferguson-lees et al .
39  p .
40  586, and dickinson et al .
41 ) has therefore considered all to be members of a single widespread species  but not without equivocation: ferguson-lees et al .
42  say that if they were to make a world list , they would include the three taxa as separate species (p .
43  75), and the aou's comment includes the note "split almost certainly good" .
44 storer (1952) suggested that the southernmost populations within the nominate group were paler below , thus approaching chionogaster .
45  this has also been reflected in recent guides , where a .
46  s .
47  madrensis of southern mexico is described as being relatively pale below (compared to more northern subspecies), but if this is a sign of intergradation with chionogaster or a north-south cline which includes both the members of the nominate group and chionogaster remains unclear .
48  in bolivia , ventralis and erythronemius approach each other , but no evidence of intergradation is known  something that , without actual specimens , also would be hard to prove due to the variability in the plumage of ventralis .
49 habitata .
50  (s .
51 ) ventralis in ecuadorit occurs in a wide range of woodland and forest types , both dominated by conifers and by various types of broad-leaved trees (especially oaks) the largest populations of the nominate group (see taxonomy) are thought to occur in the temperate boreal forests , but winter in warmer regions farther south (see distribution) .
52  the taxa suttoni , madrensis (both from the nominate group), chionogaster (white-breasted hawk) and ventralis (plain-breasted hawk), are found in upper tropical to temperate highlands; mainly at altitudes of 3003,000 m (9809,840 ft), but occasionally down to near sea-level and up to 4,000 m (13,000 ft) .
53  the taxon erythronemius (rufous-thighed hawk) is found in tropical and subtropical regions; both in lowlands and highlands .
54 descriptionthis section needs additional citations for verification .
55  please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources .
56  unsourced material may be challenged and removed .
57  (april 2016) (learn how and when to remove this template message)this is a small accipiter hawk , with males 23 to 30 cm (9.1 to 11.8 in) long , with a wingspan of 42 to 58 cm (17 to 23 in) and weight from 82115 g (2.94.1 oz) .
58  as common in accipiter hawks , females are distinctly larger in size , averaging some 30% longer , and with a weight advantage of more than 50% being common .
59  the female measures 29 to 37 cm (11 to 15 in) in length , has a wingspan of 58 to 68 cm (23 to 27 in) and weighs 150 to 219 g (5.3 to 7.7 oz) .
60  the wings measure 14.122.9 cm (5.69.0 in) each , the tail is 1219 cm (4.77.5 in) long and the tarsus is 4.55.9 cm (1.82.3 in) .
61  measurements given here are for the northern group , but they are comparable for the remaining subspecies .
62 [2] adults have short broad wings and a medium-length tail banded in blackish and gray with the tip varying among individuals from slightly notched through square to slightly rounded (often narrowly tipped white) .
63  the remiges (typically only visible in flight) are whitish barred blackish .
64  the legs are long and very slender (hence the common name) and yellow .
65  the hooked bill is black and the cere is yellowish .
66  the remaining plumage varies depending on group:nominate group: cap dark and upperparts blue-grey (the former darker) .
67  often , a few more-or-less random white spots can be seen on the scapulars (feathers attached to the wing that cover the meeting of wing and body) .
68  underparts white with rufous or tawny bars .
69  crissum white .
70  thighs rufous , but often barred white .
71  the cheeks are tinged rufous (sometimes faint , but generally very distinct in taxa from the greater antilles) .
72  the irides are dark orange to red , but these are yellowish to pale orange in juveniles .
73  juveniles have dark brownish upperparts , each feather edged rufous , giving a rather scaly appearance .
74  the brown head is streaked whitish , and the whitish underparts are extensively streaked brown or reddish and usually with reddish barring on the sides .
75 a .
76  (s .
77 ) chionogaster (white-breasted hawk): resembles the members of the nominate group , but upperparts darker (often appears almost black), thighs whitish-buff and underparts and cheeks entirely white .
78  juveniles have darker upperparts and distinctly finer streaking below than juveniles of the nominate group .
79 a .
80  (s .
81 ) ventralis (plain-breasted hawk): polymorphic .
82  the most common morph has dark grey upperparts (often appears almost black) and white underparts variably barred , shaded , or mottled with rufous or tawny-buff (extensively marked individuals may appear almost entirely rufous or tawny-buff below) .
83  occasionally , the barring to the lower belly and flanks may appear duskier .
84  the white morph has bluish-grey upperparts (similar to the nominate group), but its underparts are all white except for its rufous thighs .
85  the rare dark morph , the only morph which sometimes lacks rufous thighs , is entirely sooty (occasionally with slight white barring to belly and faint grey bands in tail) .
86  the underparts of the females average paler than males of the same morph .
87  the iris is typically yellow (contra illustrations in some books), but individuals (mainly sub-adults?) with a darker iris are occasionally seen .
88  juveniles have dark brownish or dusky upperparts with each feather typically edged rufous , giving a rather scaly appearance .
89  the underparts are white streaked brown , and the thighs are rufous barred white .
90  occasionally , juveniles with underparts extensively rufous streaked blackish are seen .
91 a .
92  (s .
93 ) erythronemius (rufous-thighed hawk): resembles the nominate group , but upperparts darker , streaking to underparts rufous or dusky , cheeks typically with a clear rufous patch (occasionally lacking almost entirely) and iris yellow (contra illustrations in some books) .
94  juveniles resemble juveniles of the nominate group , but streaking to underparts typically restricted to throat and central underparts , with flanks scaled or barred (often also belly) .
95 these birds surprise and capture most of their prey from cover or while flying quickly through dense vegetation .
96  they are adept at navigating dense thickets , although this hunting method is often hazardous to the hawk .
97  the great majority of this hawk's prey are small birds , especially various songbirds such as sparrows , wood-warblers , finches , wrens , nuthatches , tits , icterids and thrushes .
98  birds caught range in size from a 4.4 g (0.16 oz) anna's hummingbird to a 577 g (1.272 lb) ruffed grouse and virtually any bird within this size range is potential prey .
99  typically , males will target smaller birds , such as sparrows and wood-warblers , and females will pursue larger prey , such as american robins and flickers , leading to a lack of conflict between the sexes for prey .
100  these hawks often exploit backyard bird feeders in order to target congregations of ideal prey .
101  they often pluck the feathers off their prey on a post or other perch .
102  rarely , sharp-shinned hawks will also eat rodents , lizards , frogs , snakes , and large insects , the latter typically being dragonflies captured on the wing during the hawk's migration .
103  bats have occasionally been recorded as a prey of this hawk .
104 [3]reproductionimmature (nominate group)sharp-shinned hawks construct a stick nest in a large conifer or dense group of deciduous trees .
105  clutches of 3 to 8 eggs have been recorded , but 4 to 5 eggs is the typical clutch size .
106  the eggs measure 37.6 mm  30 mm (1.48 in  1.18 in) and weigh about 19 g (0.67 oz) .
107  the eggs are prized by egg-collectors , because they are heavily marked with surprisingly colorful and varied markings .
108  the incubation period is thought to average at about 30 days .
109  after hatching , the young are brooded for 16 to 23 days by the female , while the male defends the territory and catches prey .
110  the young fledge at the age of about a month and rely on their parents for feeding and protection another four weeks .
111  the nesting sites and breeding behavior of sharp-shinned hawks are generally secretive , in order to avoid the predation of larger raptors , such as the northern goshawk and the cooper's hawk .
112  while in migration , adults are sometimes preyed on by most of the bird-hunting , larger raptors , especially the peregrine falcon .
113  the breeding behavior of the taxa chionogaster (white-breasted hawk), ventralis (plain-breasted hawk) and erythronemius (rufous-thighed hawk) are comparably poorly known , but based on the available knowledge they appear to differ little from that of the nominate groupconservationin north america this species declined in numbers in the 1960s and 1970s , probably as a result of the use of ddt and other pesticides .
114  the population of usa and canada has rebounded since and might even exceed historical numbers today , probably due to the combination of the ban on ddt and the proliferation of backyard bird feeders in north america which create unnaturally reliable and easy prey .
115  migratory sharp-shinned hawks are one of the most numerous raptors recorded at "hawk watches" across the country .
116  an exception is the subspecies from puerto rico , accipiter striatus venator , which is rare and listed as endangered by the u.s.
118  fish & wildlife service .
119  the remaining resident subspecies from the greater antilles , fringilliodes from cuba and nominate (a .
120  s .
121  striatus) from hispaniola , are uncommon , local , and , at least in the case of the latter , decreasing .
122  both ventralis (plain-breasted hawk) and erythronemius (rufous-thighed hawk) are fairly common (but easily overlooked due to their secretive behavior) and presently considered safe .
123  the situation for chionogaster (white-breasted hawk) is potentially more problematic due to its limited range , although it , at least locally , remains fairly common .
