0 the green-winged teal (anas carolinensis or anas crecca carolinensis) is a common and widespread duck that breeds in the northern areas of north america except on the aleutian islands .
1  it was considered conspecific with the common teal (a .
2  crecca) for some time but the issue is still being reviewed by the american ornithologists' union;[1] based on this the iucn and birdlife international[2] do not accept it as a separate species at present .
3  however , nearly all other authorities consider it distinct based on behavioral ,[3] morphological ,[4] and molecular evidence .
4 [5][6] the scientific name is from latin anas , "duck" and carolinensis , "of carolina" .
5 [7]this dabbling duck is strongly migratory and winters far south of its breeding range .
6  it is highly gregarious outside of the breeding season and will form large flocks .
7  in flight , the fast , twisting flocks resemble waders .
8 this is the smallest north american dabbling duck .
9  the breeding male has grey flanks and back , with a yellow rear end and a white-edged green speculum , obvious in flight or at rest .
10  it has a chestnut head with a green eye patch .
11  it is distinguished from drake common teals (the eurasian relative of this bird) by a vertical white stripe on side of breast , the lack of both a horizontal white scapular stripe and the lack of thin buff lines on its head .
12 the females are light brown , with plumage much like a female mallard .
13  they can be distinguished from most ducks on size , shape , and the speculum .
14  separation from female common teal is problematic .
15 in non-breeding (eclipse) plumage , the drake looks more like the female .
16 it is a common duck of sheltered wetlands , such as taiga bogs , and usually feeds by dabbling for plant food or grazing .
17  it nests on the ground , near water and under cover .
18  while its conservation status is not evaluated by iucn at present due to non-recognition of the taxon , it is plentiful enough to make it a species of least concern if it were; it is far more plentiful than the common teal .
19 [8] it can be seen in vast numbers in the marismas nacionales of western mexico , a main wintering area .
20 this is a noisy species .
21  the male has a clear whistle , whereas the female has a feeble quack .
22 distributionall three green-winged teal subspecies occur in the northern hemisphere during summer and in winter extend to northern south america , central africa , southern india , burma , and the philippines .
23  in north america , ssp .
24  carolinensis occurs across the continent and is joined in the aleutian islands by ssp .
25  nimia , which remains there throughout the year .
26  anas crecca breeds in iceland , europe , and asia .
27  it is also seen occasionally during the winter in north america along the atlantic coast .
28 [9][10]the american green-winged teal breeds from the aleutian islands , northern alaska , mackenzie river delta , northern saskatchewan , manitoba , ontario , quebec , and labrador south to central california , central nebraska , central kansas , southern minnesota , wisconsin , ontario , quebec , newfoundland , and the maritime provinces .
29 [9][11]the american green-winged teal winters from southern alaska and southern british columbia east to new brunswick and nova scotia and south to central america .
30  it also winters in hawaii .
31 [11]plant communitiesgreen-winged teal are abundant in wetlands of the canadian parkland and northern boreal forest associations .
32  they occur more often in mixed-prairie associations than in shortgrass associations .
33  they also inhabit arctic tundra and semidesert communities .
34 [9][10]within the above associations , green-winged teal commonly inhabit wetland communities dominated by bulrushes (scirpus spp .
35 ), cattails (typha spp .
36 ), sedges (carex spp .
37 ), pondweeds (potamogeton spp .
38 ) and other emergent and aquatic vegetation .
39 [9][11] green-winged teal frequently nest in grasses , sedge meadows , or on dry hillsides having brush or aspen (populus spp .
40 ) cover .
41 [10] near brooks , alberta , green-winged teal nests were found most often in beds of rushes (juncus spp .
42 ), and in western montana most nests were located under greasewood (sarcobatus spp .
43 ) .
44 [9]major life eventsnesting chronology varies geographically .
45  in north dakota , green-winged teal generally begin nesting in late april .
46  in the northwest territories , canada , green-winged teal begin nesting between late may and early july .
47  at minto lakes , alaska , green-winged teal initiate nesting as early as june 1 and as late as july 20.[9]green-winged teal become sexually mature their first winter .
48 [9] they lay 5 to 16 eggs .
49  the incubation period is 21 to 23 days .
50 [9][12]green-winged teals often fledge 34 to 35 days after hatching or usually before 6 weeks of age .
51 [9][10] young green-winged teal have the fastest growth rate of all ducks .
52 [9]male green-winged teal leave females at the start of incubation and congregate on safe waters to molt .
53  some populations undergo an extensive molt migration while others remain on or near breeding grounds .
54  females molt on breeding grounds .
55 [13]green-winged teal are among the earliest spring migrants .
56  they arrive on nesting areas almost as soon as the snow melts .
57 [10] in early february , green-winged teal begin to depart their winter grounds , and continue through april .
58  in central regions green-winged teal begin to arrive early in march with peak numbers in early april .
59 [9]in northern areas of the united states , green-winged teal migrating to wintering grounds appear in early september through mid-december .
60  they begin migrating into most central regions during september and often remain through december .
61  on their more southerly winter areas , green-winged teal arrive as early as late september , but most do not appear until late november .
62 [9]preferred habitatgreen-winged teal inhabit inland lakes , marshes , ponds , pools , and shallow streams with dense emergent and aquatic vegetation .
63 [9][10][11][12] they prefer shallow waters and small ponds and pools during the breeding season .
64 [13] green-winged teal are often found resting on mudbanks or stumps , or perching on low limbs of dead trees .
65  these ducks nest in depressions on dry ground located at the base of shrubs , under a log , or in dense grass .
66  the nests are usually 2 to 300 ft (0.61 to 91.44 m) from water .
67  green-winged teal avoid treeless or brushless habitats .
68  green-winged teal winter in both freshwater or brackish marshes , ponds , streams , and estuaries .
69 [10][11] as they are smaller birds , they tend to stay in the calmer water .
70 cover requirementsgreen-winged teal nests are usually concealed both from the side and from above in heavy grass , weeds , or brushy cover .
71 [10] cattails , bulrushes , smartweeds (polygonum spp .
72 ), and other emergent vegetation provide hiding cover for ducks on water .
73 [14]food habitsgreen-winged teal , more than any other species of duck , prefer to seek food on mud flats .
74  where mud flats are lacking , they prefer shallow marshes or temporarily flooded agricultural lands .
75 [9][11] they usually eat vegetative matter consisting of seeds , stems , and leaves of aquatic and emergent vegetation .
76  green-winged teal appear to prefer the small seeds of nutgrasses (cyperus spp .
77 ), millets (panicum spp .
78 ), and sedges to larger seeds , but they also consume corn , wheat , barley , and buttonbush (cephalanthus spp .
79 ) seeds .
80 [9] in marshes , sloughs , and ponds , green-winged teal select the seeds of bulrushes , pondweeds , and spikerushes (eleocharis spp .
81 ) .
82  to a lesser extent they feed upon the vegetative parts of muskgrass (chara spp .
83 ), pondweeds , widgeongrass (ruppia maritima), and duckweeds (lemna spp .
84 ) .
85 [9] they will occasionally eat insects , mollusks , and crustaceans .
86 [9][11] occasionally during spring months , green-winged teal will gorge on maggots of decaying fish which are found around ponds .
87 [12]predatorscommon predators of green-winged teal include humans , skunks (mephitis and spilogale spp .
88 ), red foxes (vulpes vulpes), raccoons (pryon lotor), crows , and magpies (pica spp .
89 ) .
90 [9]relationshipsmtdna data-wise , this species is more closely related to the speckled teal than to the common teal .
91 [5] this would require that sexual dimorphism either was lost in the speckled teal or that it evolved in near-identical forms in the green-winged and common teal after the divergence of the green-winged and speckled teal lineages .
92 both hypotheses seem rather spurious initially , with the green-winged teal and common teal's male nuptial plumage being unique and very complex , and the tendency to gain , not lose , strong sexual dimorphism overwhelming in the dabbling ducks .
93  an alternative explanation given the high frequency of hybridisation in ducks[8] would be that the mtdna of the present-day green-winged teal is originally derived from spotted teal females by introgression and thus the molecular data gives a misleading picture of the species' true relationships .
94  this is supported by the observation that in mallard  american black duck hybrids , females of both taxa prefer the sexually dimorphic mallard drakes over the dull-plumaged black duck drakes;[15][16] that the green-winged teal is in some aspectssuch as the less contrasting nuptial plumageintermediate between the common and speckled teal is also interesting to note .
95 alternatively , the common teal might be derived from the green-winged teal , with the molecular difference being due to genetic drift or a founder effect in the latter and possibly speckled teal introgression in the former .
96  the three teals certainly belong to a superspecies in the teals ("nettion"); the ancestors of this group were most likely sexually monomorphic southern hemisphere forms (johnson & sorenson , 1999;[5] note that their "african" distribution includes bernier's teal taxa which like many madagascar taxa is of indo-australian origin) .
97 another possibility[17] is that the american lineage is derived from stray common teals , with the founder effect/genetic drift and/or hybrid introgression phenomena applying as above , only in the reverse direction for the former two .
98  still , this would require loss of sexual dimorphism in the ancestors of the speckled teal , but while extremely rare in dabbling ducks , it is not per se impossible .
99 the close relationship of speckeld and green-winged teals suggested by mtdna data could of course still apply to the taxa in general , not just to sequences in 2 maternally inherited genes in a few individual ducks (for which it without doubt does apply), but the overall failure of johnson & sorenson to seriously take hybridization into account and their small sample sizes and obsolete conceptions of indian ocean biogeography do not help at all to resolve the issue ,[18] but in 1999, the methodology and interpretation were reasonable enough and in fact , the study was pioneering in many respects due to dense taxon-level sampling and still represents one of the default references for interpreting the pyhlogeny of the genus .
100 the post-copulatory displays of the common and green-winged teal are identical , but those of the speckled teal have some additional elements .
101 [19]a firm conclusion cannot be reached at present beyond a tentative rejection of the phylogeny suggested by the mtdna data .
102  nuclear dna sequence information is required , but may not be sufficient , to resolve the puzzling relationships in the crecca-carolinensis-flavirostris complex of teals .
