0 anna's hummingbird (calypte anna), a medium-sized hummingbird native to the west coast of north america , was named after anna massna , duchess of rivoli .
1 [2] in the early 20th century , anna's hummingbird bred only in northern baja california and southern california .
2  the transplanting of exotic ornamental plants in residential areas throughout the pacific coast and inland deserts provided expanded nectar and nesting sites , allowing the species to more extensively expand its breeding range .
3 [2][3]descriptionanna's hummingbird is 3.9 to 4.3 in (9.9 to 10.9 cm) long .
4  it has an iridescent bronze-green back , a pale grey chest and belly , and green flanks .
5  its bill is long , straight and slender .
6  the adult male has an iridescent crimson-red derived from magenta to a reddish-pink crown and gorget , which can look dull brown or gray without direct sunlight and a dark , slightly forked tail .
7  female anna's hummingbirds also have iridescent red gorgets , though they are usually smaller and less brilliant than the males' .
8  anna's is the only north american hummingbird species with a red crown .
9 [3] females and juvenile males have a dull green crown , a grey throat with or without some red iridescence , a grey chest and belly , and a dark , rounded tail with white tips on the outer feathers .
10 these birds feed on nectar from flowers using a long extendable tongue .
11  they also consume small insects and other arthropods caught in flight or gleaned from vegetation .
12  a pbs documentary shows how anna's hummingbirds eat flying insects .
13 [4] they aim for the flying insect , then open their beaks to capture the prey .
14 while collecting nectar , they also assist in plant pollination .
15  this species sometimes consumes tree sap .
16 [5] the male's call is scratchy metallic , and it perches above head-level in trees and shrubs .
17 [3] they are frequently seen in backyards and parks , and commonly found at feeders and flowering plants .
18 anna's hummingbirds can shake their bodies 55 times per second to shed rain while in flight .
19 [6] when done in dry weather , shaking may remove pollen or dirt from feathers .
20 [6]reproductionopen-wooded or shrubby areas and mountain meadows along the pacific coast from british columbia to arizona make up c .
21  anna's breeding habitat .
22  the female raises the young without the assistance of the male .
23  the female bird builds a nest in a shrub or tree , in vines , or attached to wires or other artificial substrates .
24  the round , 3.8-to-5.1-centimetre (1.5 to 2.0 in) diameter nest is constructed of plant fibers , downy feathers and animal hair; the exterior is camouflageed with chips of lichen , plant debris , and occasionally urban detritus such as paint chips and cigarette paper .
25 [2] the nest materials are bound together with spider silk .
26  they are known to nest as early as mid-december and as late as june , depending on geographic location and climatic conditions .
27 [citation needed]unlike most northern temperate hummingbirds , the male anna's hummingbird sings during courtship .
28  the song is thin and squeaky , interspersed with buzzes and chirps , and is drawn to over 10 seconds in duration .
29  during the breeding season , males can be observed performing an aerial display dive over their territories .
30  the males also use the dive display to drive away rivals or intruders of other species .
31  when a female flies onto a male's territory , he rises up approximately 130 ft (40 m) before diving over the recipient .
32  as he approaches the bottom of the dive the males reach an average speed of 27 m/s (89 ft/s), which is 385 body lengths per second .
33 [7] at the bottom of the dive the male travels 23 m/s (51 mph), and produces a loud sound described by some as an "explosive squeak" with his outer tail-feathers .
34 [8][9]anna's hummingbirds hybridize fairly frequently with other species , especially the congeneric costa's hummingbird .
35 [2] these natural hybrids have been mistaken for new species .
36  a bird , allegedly collected in bolaos , mexico , was described and named selasphorus floresii (gould , 1861), or floresi's hummingbird .
37  several more specimens were collected in california over a long period , and the species was considered extremely rare .
38 [10] it was later determined that the specimens were the hybrid offspring of an anna's hummingbird and an allen's hummingbird .
39  a single bird collected in santa barbara , california , was described and named trochilus violajugulum (jeffries , 1888), or violet-throated hummingbird .
40 [11] it was later determined to be a hybrid between an anna's hummingbird and a black-chinned hummingbird .
41 [12][13]locomotionduring hovering flight , anna's hummingbirds maintain high wingbeat frequencies accomplished by their large pectoral muscles via recruitment of motor units .
42 [14] the pectoral muscles that power hummingbird flight are composed exclusively of fast glycolytic fibers that respond rapidly and are fatigue resistant .
43 [14]distributionanna's hummingbirds are found along the western coast of north america , from southern canada to northern baja california , and inland to southern and central arizona , extreme southern nevada and southeastern utah , and western texas .
44 [2] they tend to be permanent residents within their range , and are very territorial .
45  however , birds have been spotted far outside their range in such places as southern alaska , saskatchewan , new york , florida , louisiana and newfoundland .
46 [15][16]anna's hummingbirds have the northernmost year-round range of any hummingbird .
47  during cold temperatures , anna's hummingbirds gradually gain weight during the day as they convert sugar to fat .
48 [17][18] in addition , hummingbirds with inadequate stores of body fat or insufficient plumage are able to survive periods of sub-freezing weather by lowering their metabolic rate and entering a state of torpor .
49 [19]there are an estimated 1.5 million anna's hummingbirds .
50  their population appears to be stable , and they are not considered an endangered species .
