0 the wilson's phalarope (phalaropus tricolor) is a small wader .
1  this bird , the largest of the phalaropes , breeds in the prairies of north america in western canada and the western united states .
2  it is migratory , wintering in inland salt lakes near the andes in argentina .
3 [2] they are passage migrants through central america around march/april and again during september/october .
4 [3] the species is a rare vagrant to western europe .
5 this species is often very tame and approachable .
6  its common name commemorates the american ornithologist alexander wilson .
7  sometimes , it is placed in a monotypic genus steganopus .
8 descriptionfirst-cycle with some retained juvenile covertswilson's phalarope is slightly larger than the red phalarope at about 23 cm (9.1 in) in length .
9  it is a dainty shorebird with lobed toes and a straight fine black bill .
10  the breeding female is predominantly gray and brown above , with white underparts , a reddish neck and reddish flank patches .
11  the breeding male is a duller version of the female , with a brown back , and the reddish patches reduced or absent .
12  in a study of breeding phalaropes in saskatchewan province in canada , females were found to average around 10% larger in standard measurements and to weigh around 30% more than the males .
13  females weighed from 68 to 79 g (2.4 to 2.8 oz), whereas males average 51.8 g (1.83 oz) .
14 [4]young birds are grey and brown above , with whitish underparts and a dark patch through the eye .
15  in winter , the plumage is essentially grey above and white below , but the dark eyepatch is always present .
16  the average longevity in the wild is 10 years .
17 [5]ecology and statuswilson's phalaropes are unusually halophilic (salt-loving) and feed in great numbers when on migration on saline lakes such as mono lake in california , lake abert in oregon , and the great salt lake of utah , often with red-necked phalaropes .
18 when feeding , a wilson's phalarope will often swim in a small , rapid circle , forming a small whirlpool .
19  this behaviour is thought to aid feeding by raising food from the bottom of shallow water .
20  the bird will reach into the outskirts of the vortex with its bill , plucking small insects or crustaceans caught up therein .
21 the typical avian sex roles are reversed in the three phalarope species .
22  females are larger and more brightly coloured than males .
23  the females pursue males , compete for nesting territory , and will aggressively defend their nests and chosen mates .
24  once the females lay their eggs , they begin their southward migration , leaving the males to incubate the eggs .
25  three to four eggs are laid in a ground nest near water .
26  the young feed themselves .
27 although very common , this bird's population may have declined in some areas due to the loss of prairie wetland habitat .
28  a few staging areas are of critical importance during migration .
