0 the black-crowned night heron (nycticorax nycticorax), commonly abbreviated to just night heron in eurasia , is a medium-sized heron found throughout a large part of the world , except in the coldest regions and australasia (where it is replaced by the closely related rufous night heron , with which it has hybridized in the area of contact) .
1 descriptionadults are approximately 64 cm (25 in) long and weigh 800 g (28 oz) .
2  they have a black crown and back with the remainder of the body white or grey , red eyes , and short yellow legs .
3  they have pale grey wings and white under parts .
4  two or three long white plumes , erected in greeting and courtship displays , extend from the back of the head .
5  the sexes are similar in appearance although the males are slightly larger .
6  black-crowned night herons do not fit the typical body form of the heron family .
7  they are relatively stocky with shorter bills , legs , and necks than their more familiar cousins , the egrets and "day" herons .
8  their resting posture is normally somewhat hunched but when hunting they extend their necks and look more like other wading birds .
9 immature birds have dull grey-brown plumage on their heads , wings , and backs , with numerous pale spots .
10  their underparts are paler and streaked with brown .
11  the young birds have orange eyes and duller yellowish-green legs .
12  they are very noisy birds in their nesting colonies , with calls that are commonly transcribed as quok or woc .
13 distributionthe breeding habitat is fresh and salt-water wetlands throughout much of the world .
14  the subspecies n .
15  n .
16  hoactli breeds in north and south america from canada as far south as northern argentina and chile , n .
17  n .
18  obscurus in southernmost south america , n .
19  n .
20  falklandicus in the falkland islands , and the nominate race n .
21  n .
22  nycticorax in europe , asia and africa .
23  black-crowned night herons nest in colonies on platforms of sticks in a group of trees , or on the ground in protected locations such as islands or reedbeds .
24  three to eight eggs are laid .
25 this heron is migratory in the northernmost part of its range , but otherwise resident (even in the cold patagonia) .
26  the north american population winters in mexico , the southern united states , central america , and the west indies , and the old world birds winter in tropical africa and southern asia .
27 a colony of the herons has regularly summered at the national zoo in washington , d .
28 c .
29  for more than a century .
30 [2]behaviourthese birds stand still at the water's edge and wait to ambush prey , mainly at night or early morning .
31  they primarily eat small fish , crustaceans , frogs , aquatic insects , small mammals , and small birds .
32  during the day they rest in trees or bushes .
33  n .
34  n .
35  hoactli is more gregarious outside the breeding season than the nominate race .
36 parasitesa thorough study performed by j .
37  sitko and p .
38  heneberg in the czech republic in 19622013 suggested that the central european black-crowned night herons host 8 helminth species .
39  the dominant species consisted of neogryporhynchus cheilancristrotus (62% prevalence), contracaecum microcephalum (55% prevalence) and opistorchis longissimus (10% prevalence) .
40  the mean number of helminth species recorded per host individual reached 1.41. in ukraine , other helminth species are often found in black-crowned night herons too , namely echinochasmus beleocephalus , echinochasmus ruficapensis , clinostomum complanatum and posthodiplostomum cuticola .
41 [3]etymologynycticorax means "night raven" and derives from the ancient greek nuktos "night" and korax , "raven" .
42  it refers to the largely nocturnal feeding habits and croaking crow-like call of this species .
43 [4]in the falkland islands , the bird is called "quark", which is an onomatopoeia similar to its name in many other languages , like "kwak" in dutch and frisian , "kvako non" in czech , "" in ukrainian , "" in russian , "vc" in vietnamese , "kowak-malam" in indonesian , and "waqwa" in quechua .
