0 the common loon (gavia immer) is a large member of the loon , or diver , family of birds .
1  the species is known as the great northern diver in eurasia; another former name , great northern loon , was a compromise proposed by the international ornithological committee .
2 [2]taxonomythe common loon is one of the five loon species that make up the genus gavia , the only genus of the family gavidae and order gaviiformes .
3  its closest relative is the other large black-headed species , the yellow-billed loon or white-billed diver , gavia adamsii .
4 [3]the genus name gavia was the latin term for the smew (mergellus albellus) .
5  this small sea-duck is quite unrelated to loons and just happens to be another black-and-white seabird which swims and dives for fish .
6  it is unlikely that the ancient romans had much knowledge of loons , as they are limited to more northern latitudes and since the end of the last glacial period seem to have occurred only as rare winter migrants in the mediterranean region .
7 [4][5] the specific name immer is derived from north germanic names for the bird such as modern icelandic "himbrimi" .
8 [6] the term may be related to swedish immer and emmer , the grey or blackened ashes of a fire , referring to its dark plumage; or to latin immergo , to immerse , and immersus , submerged .
9 [7]the european name "diver" comes from the bird's habit of catching fish by swimming calmly along the surface and then abruptly plunging into the water .
10  the north american name "loon" is a reference to the bird's clumsiness on land , and is derived from scandinavian words for lame , such as icelandic "linn" and swedish "lam" .
11  having large webbed feet , the loons are efficient predators , powerful swimmers , and adroit divers .
12 descriptionin flightadults can range from 61 to 100 cm (24 to 39 in) in length with a 122152 cm (4860 in) wingspan , slightly smaller than the similar yellow-billed loon (or "white-billed diver") .
13  the weight can vary from 1.6 to 8 kg (3.5 to 17.6 lb) .
14  on average , a common loon is about 81 cm (32 in) long , has a wingspan of 136 cm (54 in), and weighs about 4.1 kg (9.0 lb) .
15 breeding adults have a black head , white underparts , and a checkered black-and-white mantle .
16  non-breeding plumage is brownish , with the chin and foreneck white .
17  the bill is black-blue and held horizontally .
18  the bill colour and angle distinguish this species from the similar yellow-billed loon .
19 bone structure: a number of solid bones (unlike normally hollow avian bones), which add weight but help in diving .
20 [8]distribution and habitatin the spring and summer , most common loons live on lakes and other waterways in canada and the northern united states .
21 [9] the summer habitat of common loons ranges from wooded lakes to tundra ponds .
22  the lakes must be large enough for take-off and provide a high population of small fish .
23 [10] clear water is necessary so that they can see fish to prey on .
24  as protection from predators , loons favor lakes with islands and coves .
25 [11]loons during their winter migration can be seen as far as baja california and texas in the south and northwestern europe in the east .
26  loons usually migrate to the nearest body of water that will not freeze over in the winter: western canadian loons to the pacific , great lakes loons to the gulf of mexico region , eastern canadian loons to the atlantic , and some loons to large inland lakes and reservoirs .
27 [11]behaviourchicks will ride on their parents' backsthis species , like all divers , is a specialist fish-eater , catching its prey underwater , diving as deep as 60 m (200 ft)[8] and can remain underwater for as long as 3 minutes .
28 [12] freshwater diets consist of pike , perch , sunfish , trout , and bass; salt-water diets consist of rock fish , flounder , sea trout , and herring .
29  the bird needs a long distance to gain momentum for take-off , and is ungainly on landing .
30  its clumsiness on land is due to the legs being positioned at the rear of the body: this is ideal for diving but not well-suited for walking .
31  when the birds land on water , they skim along on their bellies to slow down , rather than on their feet , as these are set too far back .
32  the loon swims gracefully on the surface , dives as well as any flying bird , and flies competently for hundreds of kilometres in migration .
33  it flies with its neck outstretched , usually calling a particular tremolo that can be used to identify a flying loon .
34  its flying speed is as much as 120 km/h (75 mph) during migration .
35 [8] its call has been alternately called "haunting", "beautiful", "thrilling", "mystical", and "enchanting" .
36 [13][14]common loon nests are usually placed on islands , where ground-based predators cannot normally access them .
37  however , eggs and nestlings have been taken by gulls , corvids , raccoons , skunks , minks , foxes , snapping turtles , and large fish .
38  adults are not regularly preyed upon , but have been taken by sea otters (when wintering) and bald eagles .
39 [15] ospreys have been observed harassing divers , more likely out of kleptoparasitism than predation .
40 [16] when approached by a predator of either its nest or itself , divers sometimes attack the predator by rushing at it and attempting to impale it through the abdomen or the back of the head or neck .
41 breedingcommon loons mate monogamously and annually .
42  they begin breeding at two years of age .
43  the pair of mates claims a breeding territory of 60 to 200 acres and patrols it frequently , defending and marking the territory both physically and vocally .
44  both the male and female parents build the nest and take turns incubating the eggs .
45 [9] the nests are constructed out of dead marsh grasses and other indigenous plants and formed into mounds along the vegetated coasts of lakes .
46  after a week of construction in late spring , one parent climbs on top to mold the nest to the shape of its body .
47 [11] these nest sites are often reused annually , and studies suggest that these renesting attempts are more likely to succeed than the initial attempt .
48 [17]nest sites typically resemble those on which the parents were hatched .
49  instead of avoiding acidity and poor water quality , the parents risk reproductive success for better survival chances and choose lakes that yield similar fish to their regular diet .
50 [18]the eggs hatch in just under a month .
51  when the chicks are a few days old , they will begin to leave the nest with the parents , swimming and sometimes riding on one parents back .
52  they are capable of diving underwater in the next few days and can typically fly at 1011 weeks old .
53 [10]common loons have faced a decline in breeding range primarily due to hunting , predation , human destruction of habitat , contaminant exposure , and water-level fluctuations , or flooding .
54  some environmentalists attempt to increase nesting success by mitigating the effects of some of these threats , namely terrestrial predation and water-level fluctuations , through the deployment of rafts , artificial nesting islands , in the breeding territories of common loons .
55 [19]vocalizationloons produce a variety of vocalizations , the most common of which are categorized into four main types: the tremolo , the yodel , the wail , and the hoot .
56  each of these calls communicates a distinct message .
57 the frequency at which loons vocalize has been shown to vary based on time of day , weather , and season .
58  they are most vocally active between mid-may and mid-june .
59  the wail , yodel , and tremolo calls are sounded more frequently at night than during the day , and calls have also been shown to occur more frequently in cold temperatures and when there is little to no rain .
60 [20]the tremolothe tremolo callsometimes called the laughing callis characterized by its short , wavering quality .
61  loons often use this call to signal distress or alarm caused by territorial disputes or perceived threats .
62 [20] loons also use the tremolo to communicate their presence to other loons when they arrive at a lake , often when they are flying overhead .
63  it is the only vocalization used in flight .
64 [21]the tremolo call has varying levels of intensity and can be identified as type i , ii , or iii .
65  these levels correlate with a loons level of distress , and the types are differentiated by increasingly higher pitch frequencies added to the call .
66 [22]the yodelthe yodel is a long and complex call made only by male loons .
67  it is used in the establishment of territorial boundaries and in territorial confrontations , and the length of the call corresponds with the loon's level of aggression .
68 [23] every male loon has a unique yodel , which changes if the loon changes territory .
69 [11]the waila loons wail is a long call consisting of up to three notes , and is often compared to a wolfs howl .
70  loons use this call to communicate their location to other loons .
71  the call is given back and forth between breeding pairs or an adult and their chick , either to maintain contact or in an attempt to move closer together after being separated .
72 [21]the hootthe hoot is a short , soft call and is another form of contact call .
73  it is a more intimate call than the wail and is used exclusively between small family groups or flocks .
74 [20] loons hoot to let other family or flock members know where they are .
75  this call is often heard when adult loons are summoning their chicks to feed .
76 [21]the diet of common loons consists primarily of fish , especially perch and sunfish in lakes and atlantic croaker and gulf silversides on ocean coasts .
77 [11] common loons will feed on fish up to 10 inches in length , including minnows , suckers , gizzard shad , rock cod , and killifish .
78 [10] young loons typically eat small minnows , and sometimes insects .
79 [9]common loons use their powerful hind legs to propel their bodies underwater at incredible speeds to catch their prey , which they then swallow headfirst .
80  if the fish attempt to evade the grasp of the common loon , the bird will chase it down with excellent underwater maneuverability due to their tremendously strong legs .
81 [11] most prey is swallowed underwater , where it is caught , but some larger prey is first brought to the surface .
82 [9]loons are visual predators , so it is essential to hunting success that the water is transparent .
83 [9] if there is either a lack of fish or of ability to catch fish , loons will prey on crustaceans , snails , leeches , insect larvae , mollusks , frogs , and occasionally aquatic plant life .
84 [11]young loons typically eat small minnows , and sometimes insects .
85 [9]relationship with humansthese birds have disappeared from some lakes in eastern north america due to the effects of acid rain and pollution , as well as lead poisoning from fishing sinkers and mercury contamination from industrial waste .
86  artificial floating nesting platforms have been provided for loons in some lakes to reduce the impact of changing water levels due to dams and other human activities .
87 the common loon is one of the species to which the agreement on the conservation of african-eurasian migratory waterbirds (aewa) applies .
88 in popular culturethis bird is well known in canada , appearing on the one-dollar "loonie" coin and the previous series of $20 bills , and is the provincial bird of ontario .
89  also , it is the state bird of minnesota and appears on the minnesota state quarter .
90 the voice and appearance of the common loon has made it prominent in several native american tales .
91  these include a story of a loon which created the world in a chippewa story; a micmac saga describes kwee-moo , the loon who was a special messenger of glooscap (glu-skap), the tribal hero; native tribes of british columbia believed that an excess of calls from this bird predicted rain , and even brought it; and the tale of the loon's necklace was handed down in many versions among pacific coast peoples .
92  folk names include big loon , black-billed loon , call-up-a-storm , ember-goose , greenhead , guinea duck , imber diver , ring-necked loon , and walloon .
93 this bird is central to the plot of the children's novel great northern? by arthur ransome (in which it is referred to throughout as great northern diver , with the obsolete scientific name colymbus immer) .
94  the story is set in the outer hebrides , where the main charactersa group of children on holidaynotice a pair of divers apparently nesting there .
95  checking their bird book , they believe this to be the great northern diver; however , this has not previously been seen to nest in northern scotland , and so they ask for help from an ornithologist .
96  he confirms that these birds are indeed the great northern; unfortunately , it soon transpires that he does not wish merely to observe , but wants to steal the eggs and add them to his collection; and to do this , he must first kill the birds .
97  published in 1947, the story is one where the conservationists are the eventual victors over the egg collector , at a time when the latter hobby was not widely considered to be harmful .
