0 the broad-tailed hummingbird (selasphorus platycercus) is a medium-sized hummingbird , nearly 4 in (10 cm) in length .
1  it is one of seven species in the genus selasphorus .
2 male and female both have iridescent green backs and crowns and a white breast .
3  the male has a gorget (throat patch) that shines with a brilliant pink-red iridescence and a broad , predominantly black tail accented with varying amounts of green , rufous , and occasionally white .
4  the female is much duller with pale rust-colored sides and outer tail feathers banded in rufous , green , black , and white .
5  in flight the male's wings produce a distinct trilling sound diagnostic for this species .
6 [2][3]the summer range of the broad-tailed hummingbird extends across mountain forests and meadows throughout the western united states , specifically the central rocky mountain region and southwards; the resident birds range from the cordilleran mountain areas of northern mexico as far south as guatemala .
7  at summer's end the northerly birds migrate and overwinter in the southern part of their range .
8  this species is somewhat vagrant , especially wintering birds , and is regularly seen in el salvador where it does not breed .
9  they occur at altitudes ranging from 700900 m (2,3003,000 ft) up to 3,350 m (10,990 ft) asl in the tropical parts of their range .
10 [4]broad-tailed hummingbirds consume the typical hummingbird diet of flower nectar[5] and arthropods , which are taken in flight and gleaned from vegetation .
11  sap from trees and shrubs is used as a nectar substitute .
12 [6]female at nestnests are small cup of plant fibers woven together and bound to a branch with collected spider webs .
13  the female lays two plain white eggs that she alone will incubate for 16 to 19 days .
14 [6] young broad-tailed hummingbirds fledge about 23 days after hatching .
15  this species is known to hybridize with other hummingbird species , including black-chinned , white-eared , and costa's .
16 [3][7]this species is not considered endangered; it appears to be able to adapt quite well to human-modified habitat and frequents shade coffee plantations .
