0 the grey plover (pluvialis squatarola), known as the black-bellied plover in north america , is a medium-sized plover breeding in arctic regions .
1  it is a long-distance migrant , with a nearly worldwide coastal distribution when not breeding .
2 [2] the genus name is latin and means relating to rain , from pluvia , "rain" .
3  it was believed that golden plovers flocked when rain was imminent .
4  the species name squatarola is a latinised version of sgatarola , a venetian name for some kind of plover .
5 [3]descriptionthey are 2730 cm (1112 in) long with a wingspan of 7183 cm (2833 in) and a weight of 190280 g (6.79.9 oz) (up to 345 g (12.2 oz) in preparation for migration) .
6  in spring and summer (late april or may to august), the adults are spotted black and white on the back and wings .
7  the face and neck are black with a white border; they have a black breast and belly and a white rump .
8  the tail is white with black barring .
9  the bill and legs are black .
10  they moult to winter plumage in mid august to early september and retain this until april; this being a fairly plain grey above , with a grey-speckled breast and white belly .
11  the juvenile and first-winter plumages , held by young birds from fledging until about one year old , are similar to the adult winter plumage but with the back feathers blacker with creamy white edging .
12  in all plumages , the inner flanks and axillary feathers at the base of the underwing are black , a feature which readily distinguishes it from the other three pluvialis species in flight .
13  on the ground , it can also be told from the other pluvialis species by its larger (2434 mm (0.941.34 in)), heavier bill .
14 [2][4]breeding and migrationtheir breeding habitat is arctic islands and coastal areas across the northern coasts of alaska , canada , and russia .
15  they nest on the ground in a dry open tundra with good visibility; the nest is a shallow gravel scrape .
16  four eggs (sometimes only three) are laid in early june , with an incubation period of 2627 days; the chicks fledge when 3545 days old .
17 [2][4]they migrate to winter in coastal areas throughout the world .
18  in the new world they winter from southwest british columbia and massachusetts south to argentina and chile , in the western old world from britain and southwestern norway south throughout coastal africa to south africa , and in the eastern old world , from southern japan south throughout coastal southern asia and australia , with a few reaching new zealand .
19  most of the migrants to australia are female .
20  it makes regular non-stop transcontinental flights over asia , europe , and north america , but is mostly a rare vagrant on the ground in the interior of continents , only landing occasionally if forced down by severe weather , or to feed on the coast-like shores of very large lakes such as the great lakes , where it is a common passage migrant .
21 [2][4][5]young birds do not breed until two years old; they typically remain on the wintering grounds until their second summer .
22 [2][4]feedingthey forage for food on beaches and tidal flats , usually by sight .
23  the food consists of small molluscs , polychaete worms , crustaceans , and insects .
24  it is less gregarious than the other pluvialis species , not forming dense feeding flocks , instead feeding widely dispersed over beaches , with birds well spaced apart .
25  they will however form dense flocks on high tide roosts .
26 [2][4]statusthe grey plover is one of the species to which the agreement on the conservation of african-eurasian migratory waterbirds (aewa) applies .
