0 the purple finch (haemorhous purpureus) is a bird in the finch family , fringillidae .
1 taxonomythis species and the other "american rosefinches" are placed in the genus haemorhous by the american ornithologists' union but have usually been included in carpodacus .
2  it is included in the finch family , fringillidae , which is made up of passerine birds found in the northern hemisphere and africa .
3  the purple finch was originally described by johann friedrich gmelin in 1789.[2]there are two subspecies of the purple finch , h .
4  p .
5  purpureus and h .
6  p .
7  californicus .
8  h .
9  p .
10  californicus was identified by spencer f .
11  baird in 1858.[2] it differs from the nominate subspecies in that it has a longer tail and shorter wing .
12  the plumage of both males and females are darker , and the coloration of the females is more greenish .
13 [3] the bill of c .
14  p .
15  californicus is also longer than that of the nominate subspecies .
16 [4]descriptionadults have a short forked brown tail and brown wings and are about 15 cm (5.9 in) in length and weigh 34 g (1.2 oz) .
17 [5] adult males are raspberry red on the head , breast , back and rump; their back is streaked .
18  adult females have light brown upperparts and white underparts with dark brown streaks throughout; they have a white line on the face above the eye .
19 habitat and distributiontheir breeding habitat is coniferous and mixed forest in canada and the northeastern united states , as well as various wooded areas along the u.s.
21  pacific coast .
22  they nest on a horizontal branch or in a fork of a tree .
23 [citation needed]birds from northern canada migrate to the southern united states; other birds are permanent residents .
24 [citation needed]the purple finch population has declined sharply in the east due to the house finch .
25  most of the time , when these two species collide , the house finch outcompetes the purple finch .
26  this bird has been also displaced from some habitat by the introduced house sparrow .
27 [6]behaviorthese birds forage in trees and bushes , sometimes in ground vegetation .
28  they mainly eat seeds , berries , and insects .
29  they are fond of sunflower seeds , millet , and thistle .
30 cultural depictionsthis is the state bird of new hampshire .
31  in 1963, richard brookes made the description of the female purple finch in mexico with the name of "chiantototl" (chia seed bird) .
