0 the brant or brent goose (branta bernicla) is a species of goose of the genus branta .
1  the black brant is an american subspecies .
2  branta is a latinised form of old norse brandgs , "burnt (black) goose) and bernicla is the medieval latin name for the barnacle .
3  the brent and the similar barnacle goose were previously considered one species , formerly believed to be the same creature as the crustacean .
4 [2] the brent system , a major oilfield , was named after the species .
5 [3]descriptionwintering at the wadden sea , germanythe brant goose is a small goose with a short , stubby bill .
6  it measures 5566 cm (2226 in) long , 106121 cm (4248 in) across the wings and weighs 0.882.2 kg (1.94.9 lb) .
7 [4][5][6] the under-tail is pure white , and the tail black and very short (the shortest of any goose) .
8 the species is divided three subspecies:dark-bellied brant goose b .
9  b .
10  bernicla (linnaeus , 1758)pale-bellied brant goose b .
11  b .
12  hrota (mller , 1776) (sometimes also known as light-bellied brant goose in europe , and atlantic brant in north america)black brant b .
13  b .
14  nigricans (lawrence , 1846) (sometimes also known as the pacific brant in north america)some dna evidence suggests that these forms are genetically distinct; while a split into three separate species has been proposed , it is not widely accepted , with other evidence upholding their maintenance as a single species .
15 the body of the dark-bellied form is fairly uniformly dark grey-brown all over , the flanks and belly not significantly paler than the back .
16  the head and neck are black , with a small white patch on either side of the neck .
17  it breeds on the arctic coasts of central and western siberia and winters in western europe , with over half the population in southern england , the rest between northern germany and northern france .
18 the pale-bellied brant goose appears blackish-brown and light grey in colour .
19  the body is different shades of grey-brown all over , the flanks and belly are significantly paler than the back and present a marked contrast .
20  the head and neck are black , with a small white patch on either side of the neck .
21  it breeds in franz josef land , svalbard , greenland and northeastern canada , wintering in denmark , northeast england , ireland and the atlantic coast of the u.s.
23  from maine to georgia .
24 the black brant appears blackish-brown and white in colour .
25  this form is a very contrastingly black and white bird , with a uniformly dark sooty-brown back , similarly-coloured underparts (with the dark colour extending furthest back of the three forms) and a prominent white flank patch; it also has larger white neck patches , forming a near-complete collar .
26  it breeds in northwestern canada , alaska and eastern siberia , and wintering mostly on the west coast of north america from southern alaska to california , but also some in east asia , mainly japan .
27 the asian populations of the black brant populations had previous been regarded as a separate subspecies orientalis based on purported paler upperparts coloration; however , it is generally now believed that this is not correct .
28 a fourth form (known variously as gray brant , intermediate brant or grey-bellied brant goose) has been proposed , although no formal subspecies description has been made as yet , for a population of birds breeding in central arctic canada (mainly melville island), and wintering on puget sound on the american west coast around the u.s.
30 /canada border .
31  these birds are intermediate in appearance between black brant and pale-bellied brant , having brown upperparts and grey underparts which give less of a contrast with the white flank patch .
32  given that this population exhibits mixed characters , it has also been proposed that , rather than being a separate subspecies , it is actually a result of interbreeding between these two forms .
33 habitatin a defensive positionit used to be a strictly coastal bird in winter , seldom leaving tidal estuaries , where it feeds on eel-grass (zostera marina) and the seaweed , sea lettuce (ulva) .
34  in recent decades , it has started using agricultural land a short distance inland , feeding extensively on grass and winter-sown cereals .
35  this may be behaviour learnt by following other species of geese .
36  food resource pressure may also be important in forcing this change , as the world population has risen over tenfold to 400,000-500,000 by the mid-1980s , possibly reaching the carrying capacity of the estuaries .
37  in the breeding season , it uses low-lying wet coastal tundra for both breeding and feeding .
38  the nest is bowl-shaped , lined with grass and down , in an elevated location , often in a small pond .
39 the brant goose is one of the species to which the agreement on the conservation of african-eurasian migratory waterbirds (aewa) applies .
