0 the american black duck (anas rubripes) is a large dabbling duck .
1  american black ducks are similar to mallards in size , and resemble the female mallard in coloration , although the black duck's plumage is darker .
2  it is native to eastern north america and has shown reduction in numbers and increasing hybridization with the more common mallard as that species has spread with man-made habitat changes .
3 ==description==american black ducks weigh {convert|720|-|1640|g|lb|abbr=on}, measure {convert|48|-|63|cm|in|abbr=on} in length and {convert|88|-|96|cm|in|abbr=on} across the wings .
4  although they are similar to mallards in size and broadly overlap in weight , according to a manual of avian body masses , they have the highest mean body mass in the anas genus , with 376 males averaging {convert|1.4|kg|lb|abbr=on} and 176 females averaging {convert|1.1|kg|lb|abbr=on} .
5  the american black duck somewhat resembles the female mallard in coloration , although the black duck's plumage is darker .
6  the male and female black duck are generally similar in appearance , but the male's bill is yellow while the female's is a dull green .
7  the head is slightly lighter brown than the dark brown body , and the speculums are iridescent violet-blue with predominantly black margins .
8  the black duck has orange legs and dark eyes .
9  in flight , the white underwings can be seen in contrast to the dark brown body .
10  the behaviour and voice are the same as for the mallard drake .
11 ==breeding==their breeding habitat is alkaline marshes , acid bogs , lakes , ponds , rivers , marshes , brackish marshes , and the margins of estuaries and other aquatic environments in northern saskatchewan , manitoba , across ontario and quebec as well as the atlantic canadian provinces , including the great lakes , and the adirondacks in the united states .
12  female black ducks lay an average of 9 eggs .
13 black ducks interbreed regularly and extensively with mallard ducks , to which they are closely related .
14  some authorities even consider the black duck to be a subspecies of the mallard , not a separate species at all .
15  mank et al .
16  argue that this is in error as the extent of hybridization alone is not a valid means to delimitate anas species .
17 in the past , it has been proposed that black ducks and mallards were formerly separated by habitat preference , with the black ducks dark plumage giving them a selective advantage in shaded forest pools in eastern north america , and the mallards lighter plumage giving an advantage in the brighter , more open prairie and plains lakes .
18  in recent times , according to this view , deforestation in the east , and tree planting on the plains , has broken down this habitat separation , leading to the high levels of hybridization now observed .
19  however , rates of past hybridization are unknown in this and most other avian hybrid zones , and it is merely presumed in the case of the american black duck that past hybridization rates were lower than those seen today .
20  also , many avian hybrid zones are known to be stable and longstanding despite the occurrence of extensive interbreeding .
21  american black ducks and local mallards are now very hard to distinguish by means of microsatellite comparisons , even if many specimens are sampled  contrary to this study's claims , the question whether the american haplotypes are an original mallard lineage is far from resolved .
22  their statement , "[n]orthern black ducks are now no more distinct from mallards than their southern conspecifics" of course only holds true in regard to the molecular markers tested .
23  as birds indistinguishable according to the set of microsatellite markers still can look different , there are other genetic differences that were simply not tested in the study .
24 the hybrids cannot be readily distinguished in the field and consequently , much of the species' hybridization dynamics remains unknown .
25  it has been revealed in captivity studies , however , most of the hybrids dont follow haldane's rule , but sometimes hybrid females die before they reach sexual maturity  this underscores the case for the american black duck being a distinct species .
26 this species is partially migratory and many winter in the east-central united states , especially coastal areas; some remain year-round in the great lakes region .
27  these birds feed by dabbling in shallow water , and grazing on land .
28  they mainly eat plants , but also some mollusks and aquatic insects .
29  the eggs are a greenish buff color .
30  they lay from 614 eggs , and hatch in an average of 30 days .
31 this duck is a rare vagrant to great britain and ireland , where , over the years , several birds have settled in and bred with the local mallards .
32  the resulting hybrids can present considerable identification difficulties .
33 ==status==the black duck has long been valued as a game bird , being extremely wary and fast on the wing .
34  although this is a species of least concern , it is slowly declining due to habitat destruction .
35  some conservationists consider the hybridization and competition with the mallard an additional source of concern , should this decline continue .
36  the hybridization itself is not the major problem; natural selection will see to it that the best-adapted individuals still have the most offspring .
37  but the reduced viability of female hybrids will cause some broods to fail in the long run as the offspring die before reproducing themselves .
38  while this is not a problem in the plentiful mallard , it might place an additional strain on the american black duck's population .
39  recent research conducted for the delta waterfowl foundation suggests that hybrids are a result of forced copulations , and not a normal pairing choice by black hens .
40 ==in popular culture==  the black duck has been portrayed in several media , most notably the black duck species being the chosen species for the character of daffy duck from looney tunes .
