0 the northern crested caracara (caracara cheriway), also called the northern caracara and crested caracara ,3 is a bird of prey in the family falconidae .
1  it was formerly considered conspecific with the southern caracara (c .
2  plancus) and the extinct guadalupe caracara (c .
3  lutosa) as the "crested caracara" .
4  it has also been known as the audubon's caracara .
5  as with its relatives , the northern caracara was formerly placed in the genus polyborus .
6  unlike the falco falcons in the same family , the caracaras are not fast-flying aerial hunters , but are rather sluggish and often scavengers .
7 distributionthe northern caracara is a resident in cuba , northern south america (south to northern peru and northern amazonian brazil) and most of central america and mexico , just reaching the southernmost parts of the united states , including florida , where it is resident but listed as threatened .
8  there have been reports of the crested caracara as far north as san francisco , california.4 and , in 2012, near crescent city , california.5 south of the us border , it is generally common .
9  it can also be found (nesting) in the southern caribbean (e .
10 g .
11  aruba , curaao and bonaire) .
12  this is a bird of open and semi-open country .
13 descriptionthe mottled breast and pinkish-purple facial skin and cere are typical of immaturesthe northern caracara has a length of 4958 cm (1923 in), a wingspan of 107130 cm (4251 in), and weighs 8001,355 g (1.7642.987 lb).6 average weight is higher in the north of the range , smaller in the tropics .
14  in florida , 21 male birds averaged 1,117 g (2.463 lb) and 18 female birds averaged 1,200 g (2.6 lb) .
15  in panama , males were found to average 834 g (1.839 lb) and females averaged 953 g (2.101 lb).7 among caracaras , it is second in size only to the southern caracara.8 broad-winged and long-tailed , it also has long legs and frequently walks and runs on the ground .
16  it is very cross-shaped in flight .
17  the adult has a black body , wings , crest and crown .
18  the neck , rump , and conspicuous wing patches are white , and the tail is white with black barring and a broad terminal band .
19  the breast is white , finely barred with black .
20  the bill is thick , grey and hooked , and the legs are yellow .
21  the cere and facial skin are deep yellow to orange-red depending on age and mood .
22  sexes are similar , but immature birds are browner , have a buff neck and throat , a pale breast streaked/mottled with brown , greyish-white legs and greyish or dull pinkish-purple facial skin and cere .
23  the voice of this species is a low rattle .
24 adults can be separated from the similar southern caracara by their less extensive and more spotty barring to the chest , more uniform blackish scapulars (brownish and often lightly mottled/barred in the southern), and blackish lower back (pale with dark barring in the southern) .
25  individuals showing intermediate features are known from the small area of contact in north-central brazil , but intergradation between the two species is generally limited .
26 habitatnorthern caracaras inhabit various types of open and semi-open country .
27  they typically live in lowlands but can live to mid-elevation in the northern andes .
28  the species is most common in cattle ranches with scattered trees , shelterbelts and small woods , as long as there is a somewhat limited human presence .
29  they can also be found in other varieties of agricultural land , as well as prairies , coastal woodlands (including mangroves), coconuts plantations , scrub along beach dunes and open uplands .
30 behaviorthe northern caracara is an carnivorous scavenger that mainly feeds on carrion .
31  the live prey they do catch is usually immobile , injured , incapacitated or young .
32  prey species can include small mammals , amphibians , reptiles , fish , crabs , insects , their larvae , earthworms , shellfish and young birds .
33  bird species that are culled can range from large , colonial nesting birds such as storks and herons to small passerines .
34  reptiles taken often including snakes , lizards and small freshwater turtles .
35  this species , along with other caracaras , is one of few raptors that hunts on foot , often turning over branches and cow dung to reach food .
36  in addition to hunting its own food on the ground , the northern caracara will steal from other birds , including vultures , buteos , pelicans , ibises and spoonbills .
37  because they stay low to the ground even when flying , they often beat cathartes vultures to carrion and can aggressively displace single vultures of most species from small carcasses .
38  they will occasionally follow trains or automobiles to fetch food that falls off.8northern caracaras can usually be spotted either alone , in pairs or family parties of 35 birds .
39  occasionally roosts may contain more than a dozen caracaras and abundant food sources can cause more than 75 to gather .
40  the nesting season is from december to may and is a bit earlier the closer the birds live to the tropics .
41  they build large stick nests in trees such as mesquites and palms , cacti , or on the ground as a last resort.9 the nests are bulky and untidy , 60100 cm (2439 in) wide and 1540 cm (5.915.7 in) deep , often made of grasses , sticks and hay , spotted with much animal matter.8 it lays 2 to 3 (rarely 1 to 4) pinkish-brown eggs with darker blotches , which are incubated for 2832 days.10taxonomyc .
42  prelutosus fossilthough the northern caracaras of our time are not divided into subspecies as their variation is clinal , prehistoric subspecies are known .
43  due to the confused taxonomic history of the crested caracaras , their relationships to the modern birds are in need of restudy:[citation needed]caracara cheriway grinnelli (la brea caracara: late pleistocene of california)caracara cheriway prelutosus (late pleistocene of mexico)the former almost certainly represents birds which were the direct ancestors of the living population .
44  the latter may actually be the ancestor of the guadalupe caracara .
45 [citation needed]florida caracarathe state of florida is home to a relict population of northern caracaras that dates to the last glacial period , which ended around 12,500 bp .
46  at that point in time , florida and the rest of the gulf coast was covered in an oak savanna .
47  as temperatures increased , the savanna between florida and texas disappeared.11 caracaras were able to survive in the prairies of central florida as well as in the marshes along the st .
48  johns river .
49  cabbage palmettos are a preferred nesting site , although they will also nest in southern live oaks.12 their historical range on the modern-day florida peninsula included okeechobee , osceola , highlands , glades , polk , indian river , st .
50  lucie , hardee , desoto , brevard , collier , and martin counties.13 they are currently most common in desoto , glades , hendry , highlands , okeechobee and osceola counties.14 loss of adequate habitat caused the florida caracara population to decline , and it was listed as threatened by the united states fish and wildlife service in 1987.13northern caracara in mexicoan immature bird surveying the surroundings in texas , usathe mexican ornithologist rafael martn del campo proposed that the northern caracara was probably the sacred "eagle" depicted in several pre-columbian aztec codices as well as the florentine codex .
51  this imagery was adopted as a national symbol of mexico , and is seen on the flag among other places .
