0 the american coot is a migratory bird that occupies most of north america .
1  it lives in the pacific and southwestern united states and mexico year-round and occupies more northeastern regions during the summer breeding season .
2  in the winter they can be found as far south as panama .
3  coots generally build floating nests and lay 812 eggs per clutch .
4  females and males have similar appearances , but they can be distinguished during aggressive displays by the larger ruff (head plumage) on the male .
5  american coots eat primarily algae and other aquatic plants but also animals (both vertebrates and invertebrates) when available .
6 the american coot is listed as least concern under the iucn conservation ratings .
7  hunters generally avoid killing american coots because their meat is not as sought after as that of ducks .
8 much research has been done on the breeding habits of american coots .
9  studies have found that mothers will preferentially feed offspring with the brightest plume feathers , a characteristic known as chick ornaments .
10  american coots are also susceptible to conspecific brood parasitism and have evolved mechanisms to identify which offspring are theirs and which are from parasitic females .
11 ==taxonomy==the american coot was first described by johann friedrich gmelin in 1789. a member of the family rallidae , it has three subspecies: fulica americana alai , f .
12  a .
13  caribaea , and f .
14  a .
15  ardesiaca .
16  these subspecies , however , are sometimes considered to be their own separate species .
17  including these 'subspecies', there are 11 members of the genus fulica distributed across the globe .
18 coot fossils from the middle pleistocene of california have been described as fulica hesterna but cannot be separated from the present-day american coot .
19  however , the pleistocene coot fulica shufeldti (formerly f .
20  minor), famously known as part of the fossil lake fauna , quite possibly was a paleosubspecies of the american coot (as fulica americana shufeldti) as they only differed marginally in size and proportions from living birds .
21  thus , it seems that the modern-type american coots evolved during the mid-late pleistocene , a few hundred thousand years ago .
22 the american coot's genus name , fulica , is a direct borrowing of the latin word for "coot" .
23  the specific epithet americana means "america" .
24 ==description==the american coot measures {convert|34|-|43|cm|in|abbr=on} in length and {convert|58|-|71|cm|in|abbr=on} across the wings .
25  adults have a short , thick , white bill and white frontal shield , which usually has a reddish-brown spot near the top of the bill between the eyes .
26  males and females look alike , but females are smaller .
27  body mass in females ranges from {convert|427|to|628|g|lb|abbr=on} and in males from {convert|576|to|848|g|lb|abbr=on} .
28  juvenile birds have olive-brown crowns and a gray body .
29  they become adult-colored around 4 months of age .
30 ===vocalizations===the american coot has a variety of repeated calls and sounds .
31  male and female coots make different types of calls to similar situations .
32  male alarm calls are puhlk while female alarm calls are poonk .
33  also , stressed males go puhk-cowah or pow-ur while females call cooah .
34 ==distribution and habitat==american coots are found near water reed-ringed lakes and ponds , open marshes , and sluggish rivers .
35  they prefer freshwater environments but may temporarily live in saltwater environments during the winter months .
36 the american coot's breeding habitat extends from marshes in southern quebec to the pacific coast of north america and as far south as northern south america .
37  birds from temperate north america east of the rocky mountains migrate to the southern united states and southern british columbia .
38  it is often a year-round resident where water remains open in winter .
39  the number of birds that stay year-round near the northern limit of the species' range seems to be increasing .
40 autumn migration occurs from august to december , with males and non-breeders moving south before the females and juveniles .
41  spring migration to breeding ranges occurs from late february to mid-may , with males and older birds moving north first .
42  there has been evidence of birds travelling as far north as greenland and iceland .
43 ==behavior==the american coot is a highly gregarious species , particularly in the winter , when its flocks can number in the thousands .
44 ===feeding===the american coot can dive for food but can also forage and scavenge on land .
45  it is omnivorous , eating plant material , arthropods , fish , and other aquatic animals .
46  its principal source of food is aquatic vegetation , especially algae .
47  during breeding season , coots are more likely to eat aquatic insects and molluskswhich constitute the majority of a chick's diet .
48 ===breeding===the coot mating season occurs during may and june .
49  coot mate pairings are monogamous throughout their life , given they have a suitable territory .
50  a typical reproductive cycle involves multiple stages: pairing , nesting , copulation , egg deposition , incubation , and hatching .
51  the american coot typically has long courtship periods .
52  this courtship period is characterized by billing , bowing , and nibbling .
53  males generally initiate billing , which is the touching of bills between individuals .
54  as the pair bond becomes more evident , both males and females will initiate billing only with each other and not other males or females .
55  after a pair bond is cemented , the mating pair looks for a territory to build a nest in .
56  a pair bond becomes permanent when a nesting territory is secured .
57  copulation behavior among coot pairs always falls under the same general pattern .
58  first the male chases the female .
59  then , the female moves to the display platform and squats with her head under the water .
60  the male then mounts the female , using his claws and wings to balance on the female's back while the she brings her head above the water .
61  sexual intercourse usually takes no longer than two seconds .
62 ====nests====the american coot is a prolific builder and will create multiple structures during a single breeding season .
63  it nests in well-concealed locations in tall reeds .
64  there are three general types of structures: display platforms , egg nests and brood nests .
65 since american coots build on the water , their structures disintegrate easily and have short life spans .
66  egg and brood nests are actually elaborate rafts , and must be constantly added to in order to stay afloat .
67  females typically do the most work while building .
68 ====egg-laying and clutch size====females deposit one egg a day until the clutch is complete .
69  eggs are usually deposited between sunset and midnight .
70  typically , early season and first clutches average two more eggs than second nestings and late season clutches .
71  early season nests see an average of 9.0 eggs per clutch while late clutches see an average of 6.4 eggs per clutch .
72  there is an inverse relationship between egg weights and laying sequence , wherein earlier eggs are larger than eggs laid later in the sequence .
73  it is possible to induce a female coot to lay more eggs than normal by either removing all or part of her clutch .
74  sometimes , a female may abandon the clutch if enough eggs are removed .
75  coots , however , do not respond to experimental addition of eggs by laying fewer eggs .
76 the american coot is a persistent re-nester , and will replace lost clutches with new ones within two days of clutch-loss during deposition .
77  one study showed that 68% of destroyed clutches are eventually replaced .
78  re-nested clutches are typically smaller than original clutches by one or two eggs , but this could be attributed to differences in time and habitat quality instead of food or nutrient reserves and availability .
79 younger females reproduce later in the season and produce smaller eggs than older females .
80  their offspring are also smaller .
81  however , there is no difference in clutch size between older and younger females like in other avian species .
82 ====incubation and hatching====incubation start time in the american coot is variable , and can begin anywhere from the deposition of the first egg to after the clutch is fully deposited .
83  starting incubation before the entire clutch has been laid is an uncommon practice among birds .
84  once incubation starts it continues without interruption .
85  male and female coots share incubation responsibility , but males do most of the work during the 21-day incubation period .
86  females will begin to re-nest clutches in an average of six days if clutches are destroyed during incubation .
87 hatch order usually follows the same sequence as laying order .
88  regardless of clutch size , eight is the typical maximum size of a brood .
89  egg desertion is a frequent occurrence among coots because females will often deposit more than eight eggs .
90  brood size limits incubation time , and when a certain number of chicks have hatched the remaining eggs are abandoned .
91  the mechanism for egg abandonment has not yet been discovered .
92  food resource constraints may limit the number of eggs parents let hatch , or the remaining eggs may not provide enough visual or tactile stimulation to elicit incubation behavior .
93  an american coot can be forced to hatch more eggs than are normally laid .
94  these additional offspring , however , suffer higher mortality rates due to inadequacy in brooding or feeding ability .
95 ====maternal effects====hormones that are passed down from the mother into the egg affect offspring growth , behavior , and social interactions .
96  these nongenetic contributions by the mother are known as maternal effects .
97  in the american coot , two levels of androgen and testosterone variation have been discoveredwithin-clutch and among-clutch variation .
98  within the same clutch , eggs laid earlier in the sequence have higher testosterone levels than eggs laid later in the sequence .
99  females that lay three clutches deposit more androgens into their yolks than females who lay only one or two clutches .
100 ===brood parasitism===the american coot has a mixed reproductive strategy , and conspecific brood parasitism is a common alternative reproductive method .
101  in one 4-year study , researchers found that 40% of nests were parasitized , and that 13% of all eggs were laid by females in nests that were not their own .
102  increasing reproductive success under social and ecological constraints is the primary reason for brood parasitism .
103  floater females without territories or nests use brood parasitism as their primary method of reproduction , if they breed at all .
104  other females may engage in brood parasitism if their partially complete clutches are destroyed .
105  conspecific brood parasitic behavior is most common among females trying to increase their total number of offspring .
106  food supply is the limiting factor to chick survival and starvation is the most common cause of chick morbidity .
107  parasitic females bypass the parental care constraint of feeding by laying additional parasitic eggs in addition to their normal nest .
108 when a parasitic female lays her egg in a host females nest , the host female experiences a deposition rate of two eggs per day .
109  host females may recognize parasitic eggs when the egg deposition pattern deviates from the traditional one egg per day pattern .
110  the occurrence of brood parasitism may be influenced by the body size of the potential parasitic female relative to the potential host female .
111  parasitic females are generally larger than their host counterparts , but on average , there is no size difference between the parasite and the host .
112 the american coot , unlike other parasitized species , has the ability to recognize and reject conspecific parasitic chicks from their brood .
113  parents aggressively reject parasite chicks by pecking them vigorously , drowning them , preventing them from entering the nest , etc .
114  they learn to recognize their own chicks by imprinting on cues from the first chick that hatches .
115  the first-hatched chick is a reference to which parents discriminate between later-hatched chicks .
116  chicks that do not match the imprinted cues are then recognized as parasite chicks and are rejected .
117 chick recognition reduces the costs associated with parasitism , and coots are one of only three bird species in which this behavior has evolved .
118  this is because hatching order is predictable in parasitized cootshost eggs will reliably hatch before parasite eggs .
119  in other species where hatching order is not as reliable , there is a risk of misimprinting on a parasite chick first and then rejecting their own chicks .
120  in these species , the cost of accidentally misimprinting is greater than the benefits of rejecting parasite chicks .
121 ===chick ornaments===the first evidence for parental selection of exaggerated , ornamental traits in offspring was found in american coots .
122  black american coot chicks have conspicuously orange-tipped ornamental plumes covering the front half of their body that are known as chick ornaments that eventually get bleached out after six days .
123  this brightly colored , exaggerated trait makes coot chicks more susceptible to predation and does not aid in thermoregulation , but remains selected for by parental choice .
124  these plumes are not necessary for chick viability , but increased chick ornamentation increases the likelihood that a chick will be chosen as a favorite by the parents .
125  experimental manipulation of chick ornamentation by clipping the bright plumes has shown that parents prefer ornamented chicks over non-ornamented ones .
126 ==predation==the american coot is fairly aggressive in defense of its eggs and , in combination with their protected nesting habitat , undoubtedly helps reduce losses of eggs and young to all but the most determined and effective predators .
127  american crows , black-billed magpies and forster's tern can sometime take eggs .
128  mammalian predators (including red foxes , coyotes , skunks and raccoons) are even less likely to predate coot nests , though nests are regularly destroyed in usurpation by muskrats .
129  conversely , the bold behavior of immature and adult coots leads to them falling prey with relative regularity once out of the breeding season .
130  regular , non-nesting-season predators include great horned owls , northern harriers , bald eagles , golden eagles , american alligators , bobcats , great black-backed and california gulls .
131  in fact , coots may locally comprise more than 80% of the bald eagle diet .
132 ==in culture==on the louisiana coast , the cajun word for coot is pouldeau , from french for "coot", poule d'eau  literally "water hen" .
133  coot can be used for cooking; it is somewhat popular in cajun cuisine , for instance as an ingredient for gumbos cooked at home by duck hunters .
134 the bird is the mascot of the toledo mud hens minor league baseball team .
135 ==conservation and threats==the american coot is listed under "least concern" by the iucn red list of endangered species .
136  they are common and widespread , and are sometimes even considered a pest .
137  they are rarely the targets of hunters since their meat is not considered to be as good as that of ducks; although some are shot for sport , particularly in the southeastern united states .
138  because they are found in wetlands , scientists use them to monitor toxin levels and pollution problems in these environments .
