0 the willet (tringa semipalmata), formerly in the monotypic genus catoptrophorus as catoptrophorus semipalmatus , is a large shorebird in the sandpiper family .
1  it is a good-sized and stout scolopacid , the largest of the shanks .
2  its closest relative is the lesser yellowlegs , a much smaller bird with a very different appearance apart from the fine , clear , and dense pattern of the neck , which both species show in breeding plumage .
3 adults have gray legs and a long , straight , dark and stout bill .
4  the body is dark gray above and light underneath .
5  the tail is white with a dark band at the end .
6  the distinctive black and white pattern of the wings is a common sight along many north american coastal beaches .
7 two subspecies (which may actually be different species) have very different breeding habitats and ranges .
8  the eastern willet breeds in coastal saltmarshes from nova scotia to mexico and the caribbean .
9  it winters on the atlantic coast of south america .
10  the western willet breeds in freshwater prairie marshes in western north america .
11  it winters on both coasts , from the mid-atlantic states south to at least brazil on the atlantic , and from oregon south to peru and chile on the pacific .
12 willets nest on the ground , usually in well-hidden locations in short grass , often in colonies .
13  these birds forage on mudflats or in shallow water , probing or picking up food by sight .
14  they mainly eat insects , crustaceans and marine worms , but also eat some plant material .
15 the willet's population declined sharply due to hunting in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries .
16  their population has since increased , but they are still considered at risk , especially in light of continued habitat loss .
17 ==gallery== file:willet (tringa semipalmata) rwd4.jpg|breeding plumage , north carolina file:willet feeding .
18 jpg|after catching a fish in manuel antonio national park , costa rica file:willet .
19 jpg|willet , north carolina file:mikebaird - willet-7958 (by) .
