0 the mourning dove (zenaida macroura) is a member of the dove family , (columbidae) .
1  the bird is also called the turtle dove or the american mourning dove or rain dove , and used to be known as the carolina pigeon or carolina turtledove .
2  it is one of the most abundant and widespread of all north american birds .
3  it is also the leading gamebird , with more than 20 million birds (up to 70 million in some years) shot annually in the u.s.
5 , both for sport and for meat .
6  its ability to sustain its population under such pressure stems from its prolific breeding: in warm areas , one pair may raise up to six broods a year .
7  the wings can make an unusual whistling sound upon take-off and landing , a form of sonation .
8  the bird is a strong flier , capable of speeds up to {convert|88|kph|abbr = on} .
9 mourning doves are light grey and brown and generally muted in color .
10  males and females are similar in appearance .
11  the species is generally monogamous , with two squabs (young) per brood .
12  both parents incubate and care for the young .
13  mourning doves eat almost exclusively seeds , but the young are fed crop milk by their parents .
14 == taxonomy ==the mourning dove is closely related to the eared dove (zenaida auriculata) and the socorro dove (zenaida graysoni) .
15  some authorities describe them as forming a superspecies and these three birds are sometimes classified in the separate genus zenaidura , but the current classification has them as separate species in the genus zenaida .
16  in addition , the socorro dove has at times been considered conspecific with the mourning dove , although several differences in behavior , call , and appearance justify separation as two different species .
17  while the three species do form a subgroup of zenaida , using a separate genus would interfere with the monophyly of zenaida by making it paraphyletic .
18 there are five subspecies of mourning dove:the ranges of most of the subspecies overlap a little , with three in the united states or canada .
19  the west indian subspecies is found throughout the greater antilles .
20  it has recently invaded the florida keys .
21  the eastern subspecies is found mainly in eastern north america , as well as bermuda and the bahamas .
22  the western subspecies is found in western north america , including parts of mexico .
23  the panamanian subspecies is located in central america .
24  the clarion island subspecies is found only on clarion island , just off the pacific coast of mexico .
25 the mourning dove is sometimes called the "american mourning dove" to distinguish it from the distantly related mourning collared dove (streptopelia decipiens) of africa .
26  it was also formerly known as the "carolina turtledove" and the "carolina pigeon" .
27  the species' scientific name was bestowed in 1838 by french zoologist charles l .
28  bonaparte in honor of his wife , princess znaide .
29  the "mourning" part of its common name comes from its call .
30  it was thought to be the passenger pigeon's closest living relative , based on morphological grounds .
31  the mourning dove was even suggested to belong to the same genus , ectopistes , and was listed by some authors as e .
32  carolinensis .
33 == distribution ==the mourning dove has a large range of nearly {convert|11000000|km2|abbr = on} .
34  the species is resident throughout the greater antilles , most of mexico , the continental united states , and southern canada .
35  much of the canadian prairie sees these birds in summer only , and southern central america sees them in winter only .
36  the species is a vagrant in northern canada , alaska , and south america .
37  it has been spotted as an accidental at least seven times in the western palearctic with records from the british isles (5), the azores (1) and iceland (1) .
38  in 1963, the mourning dove was introduced to hawaii , and in 1998 there was still a small population in north kona .
39  the mourning dove also appeared on socorro island , off the western coast of mexico , in 1988, sixteen years after the socorro dove was extirpated from that island .
40 == description ==the mourning dove is a medium-sized , slender dove approximately {convert|31|cm|abbr = on} in length .
41  mourning doves weigh {convert|112|-|170|g|abbr = on}, usually closer to {convert|128|g|abbr = on} .
42  the elliptical wings are broad , and the head is rounded .
43  its tail is long and tapered ("macroura" comes from the greek words for "large" and "tail") .
44  mourning doves have perching feet , with three toes forward and one reversed .
45  the legs are short and reddish colored .
46  the beak is short and dark , usually a brown-black hue .
47 the plumage is generally light gray-brown and lighter and pinkish below .
48  the wings have black spotting , and the outer tail feathers are white , contrasting with the black inners .
49  below the eye is a distinctive crescent-shaped area of dark feathers .
50  the eyes are dark , with light skin surrounding them .
51  the adult male has bright purple-pink patches on the neck sides , with light pink coloring reaching the breast .
52  the crown of the adult male is a distinctly bluish-grey color .
53  females are similar in appearance , but with more brown coloring overall and a little smaller than the male .
54  the iridescent feather patches on the neck above the shoulders are nearly absent , but can be quite vivid on males .
55  juvenile birds have a scaly appearance , and are generally darker .
56 all five subspecies of the mourning dove look similar and are not easily distinguishable .
57  the nominate subspecies possesses shorter wings , and is darker and more buff-colored than the "average" mourning dove .
58  z .
59  m .
60  carolinensis has longer wings and toes , a shorter beak , and is darker in color .
61  the western subspecies has longer wings , a longer beak , shorter toes , and is more muted and lighter in color .
62  the panama mourning dove has shorter wings and legs , a longer beak , and is grayer in color .
63  the clarion island subspecies possesses larger feet , a larger beak , and is darker brown in color .
64 == habitat ==the mourning dove occupies a wide variety of open and semi-open habitats , such as urban areas , farms , prairie , grassland , and lightly wooded areas .
65  it avoids swamps and thick forest .
66  the species has adapted well to areas altered by humans .
67  they commonly nest in trees in cities or near farmsteads .
68 == migration ==most mourning doves migrate along flyways over land .
69  on rare occasions , mourning doves have been seen flying over the gulf of mexico , but this is exceptional .
70  spring migration north runs from march to may .
71  fall migration south runs from september to november , with immatures moving first , followed by adult females and then by adult males .
72  migration is usually during the day , in flocks , and at low altitudes .
73  however , not all individuals migrate .
74  even in canada some mourning doves remain through winter , sustained by the presence of bird feeders .
75 == sounds ==this species' call is a distinctive , plaintive coooooo-woo-woo-woooo , uttered by males to attract females , and may be mistaken for the call of an owl at first .
76  (close up , a grating or throat-rattling sound may be heard preceding the first coo .
77 ) other sounds include a nest call (coooooo) by paired males to attract their mates to the nest sites , a greeting call (a soft ork) by males upon rejoining their mates , and an alarm call (a short roo-oo) by either male or female when threatened .
78  in flight , the wings make a fluttery whistling sound that is hard to hear .
79  the wing whistle is much louder and more noticeable upon take-off and landing .
80 == reproduction ==courtship begins with a noisy flight by the male , followed by a graceful , circular glide with outstretched wings and head down .
81  after landing , the male will approach the female with a puffed out breast , bobbing head , and loud calls .
82  mated pairs will often preen each other's feathers .
83 the male then leads the female to potential nest sites , and the female will choose one .
84  the female dove builds the nest .
85  the male will fly about , gather material , and bring it to her .
86  the male will stand on the female's back and give the material to the female , who then builds it into the nest .
87  the nest is constructed of twigs , conifer needles , or grass blades , and is of flimsy construction .
88  mourning doves will sometimes requisition the unused nests of other mourning doves , other birds , or arboreal mammals such as squirrels .
89 most nests are in trees , both deciduous and coniferous .
90  sometimes , they can be found in shrubs , vines , or on artificial constructs like buildings , or hanging flower pots .
91  when there is no suitable elevated object , mourning doves will nest on the ground .
92 see link below for: courtship dance and mating .
93 the clutch size is almost always two eggs .
94  occasionally , however , a female will lay her eggs in the nest of another pair , leading to three or four eggs in the nest .
95  the eggs are white , {convert|6.6|ml|abbr = on}, {convert|2.57|-|2.96|cm|abbr = on} long , {convert|2.06|-|2.30|cm|abbr = on} wide , {convert|6|-|7|g|abbr = on} at laying (56% of female body mass) .
96  both sexes incubate , the male from morning to afternoon , and the female the rest of the day and at night .
97  mourning doves are devoted parents; nests are very rarely left unattended by the adults .
98  when flushed from the nest , an incubating parent may perform a nest-distraction display , or a broken-wing display , fluttering on the ground as if injured , then flying away when the predator approaches it .
99 incubation takes two weeks .
100  the hatched young , called squabs , are strongly altricial , being helpless at hatching and covered with down .
101  both parents feed the squabs pigeon's milk (dove's milk) for the first 34 days of life .
102  thereafter , the crop milk is gradually augmented by seeds .
103  fledging takes place in about 1115 days , before the squabs are fully grown but after they are capable of digesting adult food .
104  they stay nearby to be fed by their father for up to two weeks after fledging .
105 mourning doves are prolific breeders .
106  in warmer areas , these birds may raise up to six broods in a season .
107  this fast breeding is essential because mortality is high .
108  each year , mortality can reach 58% a year for adults and 69% for the young .
109 the mourning dove is monogamous and forms strong pair bonds .
110  pairs typically reconvene in the same area the following breeding season , and sometimes may remain together throughout the winter .
111  however , lone doves will find new partners if necessary .
112 == ecology ==mourning doves eat almost exclusively seeds , which make up more than 99% of their diet .
113  rarely , they will eat snails or insects .
114  mourning doves generally eat enough to fill their crops and then fly away to digest while resting .
115  they often swallow grit such as fine gravel or sand to assist with digestion .
116  the species usually forages on the ground , walking but not hopping .
117  at bird feeders , mourning doves are attracted to one of the largest ranges of seed types of any north american bird , with a preference for canola , corn , millet , safflower , and sunflower seeds .
118  mourning doves do not dig or scratch for seeds , instead eating what is readily visible .
119  they will sometimes perch on plants and eat from there .
120 mourning doves show a preference for the seeds of certain species of plant over others .
121  foods taken in preference to others include pine nuts , sweetgum seeds , and the seeds of pokeberry , amaranth , canary grass , corn , sesame , and wheat .
122  when their favorite foods are absent , mourning doves will eat the seeds of other plants , including buckwheat , rye , goosegrass and smartweed .
123 mourning doves can be afflicted with several different parasites and diseases , including tapeworms , nematodes , mites , and lice .
124  the mouth-dwelling parasite trichomonas gallinae is particularly severe .
125  while a mourning dove will sometimes host it without symptoms , it will often cause yellowish growth in the mouth and esophagus that will eventually starve the host to death .
126  avian pox is a common , insect-vectored disease .
127 the primary predators of this species are diurnal birds of prey , such as falcons and hawks .
128  during nesting , corvids , grackles , housecats , or rat snakes will prey on their eggs .
129  cowbirds rarely parasitize mourning dove nests .
130  mourning doves reject slightly under a third of cowbird eggs in such nests , and the mourning dove's vegetarian diet is unsuitable for cowbirds .
131 == behavior ==like other columbids , the mourning dove drinks by suction , without lifting or tilting its head .
132  it often gathers at drinking spots around dawn and dusk .
133 mourning doves sunbathe or rainbathe by lying on the ground or on a flat tree limb , leaning over , stretching one wing , and keeping this posture for up to twenty minutes .
134  these birds can also waterbathe in shallow pools or bird baths .
135  dustbathing is common as well .
136 outside the breeding season , mourning doves roost communally in dense deciduous trees or in conifers .
137  during sleep , the head rests between the shoulders , close to the body; it is not tucked under the shoulder feathers as in many other species .
138  during the winter in canada , roosting flights to the roosts in the evening , and out of the roosts in the morning , are delayed on colder days .
139 == conservation status ==the number of individual mourning doves is estimated to be approximately 475 million .
140  the large population and its vast range explain why the mourning dove is considered to be of least concern , meaning that the species is not at immediate risk .
141  as a gamebird , the mourning dove is well-managed , with more than 20 million (and up to 4070 million) shot by hunters each year .
142 == as a symbol and in the arts ==the eastern mourning dove (z .
143  m .
144  carolinensis) is wisconsin's official symbol of peace .
145  the bird is also michigan's state bird of peace .
146 the mourning dove appears as the carolina turtle-dove on plate 286 of audubon's birds of america .
147 references to mourning doves appear frequently in native american literature .
148  mourning dove imagery also turns up in contemporary american and canadian poetry in the work of poets as diverse as robert bly , jared carter , lorine niedecker , and charles wright .
149 musical artist prince has also referenced the mourning dove in his song "when doves cry .
150 "musician joanna newsom uses clips of a mourning dove coo in the songs "anecdotes" and "time , as a symptom" from her album "divers" .
151 == closest related species ==the mourning dove is a related species to the passenger pigeon (ectopistes migratorius), which was hunted to extinction in the early 1900s .
152  for this reason , the possibility of using mourning doves for cloning the passenger pigeon has been discussed .
