0 the spotted sandpiper (actitis macularius syn .
1  actitis macularia) is a small shorebird , 1820 cm (7.17.9 in) long .
2  together with its sister species the common sandpiper (a .
3  hypoleucos), they make up the genus actitis .
4  they replace each other geographically; stray birds may settle down with breeders of the other species and hybridize .
5 their breeding habitat is near fresh water across most of canada and the united states .
6  they migrate to the southern united states and south america , and are very rare vagrants to western europe .
7  these are not gregarious birds and are seldom seen in flocks .
8 adults have short yellowish legs and an orange bill with a dark tip .
9  the body is brown on top and white underneath with black spots .
10  non-breeding birds , depicted below , do not have the spotted underparts , and are very similar to the common sandpiper of eurasia; the main difference is the more washed-out wing pattern visible in flight and the normally light yellow legs and feet of the spotted sandpiper .
11  the actitis species have a distinctive stiff-winged flight low over the water .
12 spotted sandpipers nest on the ground .
13  during each summer breeding season , females may mate with and lay clutches for more than one male , leaving incubation to them .
14  this is called polyandry .
15  male parents of first clutches may father chicks in later male's clutches , probably due to sperm storage within female reproductive tracts , which is common in birds .
16  females that fail to find additional mates usually help incubate and rear chicks .
17  "prior to incubation , blood plasma concentrations of testosterone and dihydrotestosterone are substantially higher in males than in females" and these levels plummet 25-fold in males as incubation proceeds .
18 [2] additionally , mated females have testosterone concentrations that are 7 times higher than those of unmated females .
19 [2]these birds forage on ground or water , picking up food by sight .
20  they may also catch insects in flight .
21  they eat insects , crustaceans and other invertebrates .
22  as they forage , they can be recognized by their constant nodding and teetering .
