0 the two-barred crossbill (loxia leucoptera), known as the white-winged crossbill in north america , is a small passerine bird in the finch family fringillidae .
1  it has two subspecies , white-winged crossbill loxia leucoptera leucoptera in north america , and two-barred crossbill loxia leucoptera bifasciata in ne europe and n asia .
2 this bird breeds in the coniferous forests of alaska , canada , northernmost united states and across asia extending into northeast europe .
3  it nests in conifers , laying 35 eggs .
4 this crossbill is mainly resident , but will irregularly irrupt south if its food source fails .
5  the american race seems to wander more frequently than the eurasian subspecies .
6  this species will form flocks outside the breeding season , often mixed with other crossbills .
7  it is a rare visitor to western europe , usually arriving with an irruption of red crossbills .
8 the crossbills are characterised by the mandibles crossing at their tips , which gives the group its english name .
9  they are specialist feeders on conifer cones , and the unusual bill shape is an adaptation to assist the extraction of the seeds from the cone .
10  two-barred crossbill has a strong preference for larch (larix), in eurasia using siberian larch (larix sibirica) and dahurian larch (l .
11  gmelinii), and in north america tamarack larch (l .
12  laricina) .
13  it will also take rowan sorbus berries , and in north america , also eastern hemlock (tsuga canadensis) and white spruce (picea glauca) cones .
14 femaleegg of loxia leucoptera mhntadult males tend to be red or pinkish in colour , and females green or yellow , but there is much variation .
15  two-barred is easier to identify than other crossbills , especially in north america , where only red crossbill and this species occur , but some care is still needed .
16 within its eurasian range , this species is smaller-headed and smaller-billed than parrot crossbill and scottish crossbill , so the main confusion species both there and in north america is common or red crossbill .
17 the main plumage distinction from common crossbills is the white wingbars which give this species its english and scientific names .
18  there are also white tips to the tertials .
19  the adult male is also a somewhat brighter (pinker) red than other male crossbills .
20  some common crossbills occasionally show weak white wingbars , so care is needed with the correct identification of this species .
21  the chip call is weaker and higher than that of common crossbill .
22 another crossbill on hispaniola was previously treated as a subspecies , loxia leucoptera megaplaga , but is now treated as a distinct species , hispaniolan crossbill , loxia megaplaga .
23  it is associated with the hispaniolan pine pinus occidentalis , and differs from two-barred crossbill in darker plumage and a stouter bill .
