0 the vermilion flycatcher (pyrocephalus rubinus) is a small passerine bird in the tyrannidae , or tyrant flycatcher family .
1  most flycatchers are rather drab , but the vermilion flycatcher is a striking exception .
2  it is a favorite with birders , but is not generally kept in aviculture , as the males tend to lose their vermilion coloration when in captivity .
3 descriptionthe vermilion flycatcher is a small bird , measuring 1314 cm (5.15.5 in) in length , with a mass between 11 and 14 g (0.39 and 0.49 oz) .
4 [2] it strongly dimorphic; males are bright red , with dark brown plumage .
5  females have a peach-colored belly with a dark gray upperside , and are similar to say's phoebe .
6 gallerydistribution and habitatvermilion flycatchers generally prefer somewhat open areas , and are found in trees or shrubs in savannah , scrub , agricultural areas , riparian woodlands , and desert as well , but usually near water .
7  their range includes almost all of mexico; it extends north into the southwestern united states , and south to scattered portions of central america , parts of northwestern and central south america , and on southwards to central argentina .
8  they are also found in the galpagos islands .
9  it has ranged as far north as canada .
10 [5]behaviorfeedingthe flycatchers feed mostly on insects such as flies , grasshoppers and beetles .
11  these are usually taken in mid-air , after a short sally flight from a perch .
12 [6] it is an opportunistic feeder , and has been observed eating small fish .
13 [7]breedingfemale on nestthe vermilion flycatcher's nest is a shallow cup made of small twigs and soft materials , lined with hair; the nest's rim is often covered with lichen .
14  typically located within 6 ft (1.8 m) of the ground , the nest is placed in the horizontal fork of a tree branch .
15 [8] they lay two or three whitish eggs in a nest made of twigs , stems and roots , and lined with hair .
16  the eggs are incubated for around two weeks by the female and the young are ready to leave the nest 15 days after hatching .
17 conservation and threatsbecause of its enormous range and sizable populationestimated as ranging between 5,000,000 and 50,000,000 individualsthe vermilion flycatcher is listed as a species of least concern by the international union for the conservation of nature , despite the fact that its overall numbers are declining .
18 [1] some of its subspecies , however , are known to be in trouble .
19  p .
20  r .
21  dubius , which was once reportedly common on san cristbal , has not been recorded from that island since the mid-1980s , and is thought to be extinct .
22 [4] the other galpagos subspecies , p .
23  r .
24  nanus , is also declining precipitously , principally as a result of the spread of the nonnative smooth-billed ani across the archipelago .
25 [9] the ani is known to be predatory , sometimes killing (though apparently not eating) nestling flycatchers .
26 [10]the flycatcher is also an occasional victim of brood parasitism by brown-headed cowbirds .
