0 the fox sparrow (passerella iliaca) is a large american sparrow .
1  it is the only member of the genus passerella , although some authors split the genus into four species (see below) .
2 descriptionadults are amongst the largest sparrows , heavily spotted and streaked underneath .
3  all feature a messy central breast spot though it is less noticeable on the thick billed and slate-colored varieties .
4  plumage varies markedly from one group to another .
5 behaviorthese birds forage by scratching the ground , which makes them vulnerable to cats and other predators , though they are generally plentiful .
6  fox sparrows migrate on the west coast of the united states .
7 they mainly eat seeds and insects , as well as some berries .
8  coastal fox sparrows may also eat crustaceans .
9 reproductionfox sparrows nest in wooded areas across northern canada and the west coast of north america from alaska to california .
10  they nest either in a sheltered location on the ground or low in trees or shrubs .
11  a nest typically contains two to five pale green to greenish white eggs speckled with reddish brown .
12 [2]typically seen sending up a spray of leaf litter as they kick around in search of food , fox sparrows are dark , splotchy sparrows of dense thickets .
13  named for the rich red hues that many fox sparrows wear , this species is nevertheless one of our most variable birds , with four main groups that can range from foxy red to gray to dark brown .
14  since they breed primarily in remote areas , many people see them in winter when the birds move into backyard thickets .
15 size & shapefox sparrows are large , round-bodied sparrows with stout bills and medium-length tails .
16 color patternthough highly variable (see regional differences), fox sparrows are generally rust-brown above with a mix of rust and gray on the head , and heavy brownish splotches on the flanks and the center of the chest .
17  the bill can range from yellowish to dark gray .
18 behaviorfox sparrows spend a lot of time on the ground , using their sturdy legs to kick away leaf litter in search of insects and seeds .
19  they rarely venture far from cover , and they frequently associate with other sparrows .
20  in spring and summer , listen for fox sparrows sweet , whistled song from scrub or forest; also , pay attention for a sharp smack call .
21 habitatfox sparrows breed in coniferous forest and dense mountain scrub .
22  they spend winters in scrubby habitat and forest , when they are most likely to be seen kicking around under backyard bird feeders .
23 conservation statussome counts of migrants suggest that the species has decreased in recent decades , at least in the east .
24 familynew world sparrowshabitatwooded areas , undergrowth , brush .
25  breeds in brushy areas including woodland edges and clearings , streamside thickets , scrubby second growth , stunted coastal forest .
26  winters in similar habitats , also in brushy fields , chaparral , well-vegetated suburbs and parks .
27 this big chunky sparrow nests in the far north and in western mountains , and many birders know it only as a migrant or winter visitor .
28  it is usually found on the ground under dense thickets , scratching busily in the leaf-litter with both feet .
29  on its breeding grounds , it gives a beautifully clear whistled song .
30  the bird's name refers to the bright foxy-red color of the most eastern and northern populations , but many fox sparrows in the west are predominantly gray or sooty brown .
31 photo galleryfeeding behaviorforages on ground , characteristically scratching in the soil or snow , making a little forward jump and then scratching back with both feet at once.2-5. tends to lay fewer eggs in southern part of breeding range .
32  eggs pale green to greenish white , heavily blotched with reddish brown .
33  incubation is by female only , about 12-14 days .
34  young: both parents feed the nestlings .
35  young leave the nest about 9-11 days after hatching .
36 youngboth parents feed the nestlings .
37  young leave the nest about 9-11 days after hatching .
38 mostly seeds and insects .
39  during breeding season , consumes many insects , including beetles , flies , true bugs , and others , also spiders and millipedes .
40  majority of diet at other seasons consists of seeds , mainly of weeds (such as smartweed) and grasses .
41  also eats some berries; in coastal areas , may feed on tiny crustaceans and other marine life on beaches .
42  young are fed mostly insects .
43 nestingmale sings in spring to defend nesting territory; may be aggressive toward intruders of other species as well as his own .
44  nest site is often on ground under dense cover of low shrubs .
45  sometimes nests up in shrubs or low trees , rarely more than 8' above ground .
46  nest (probably built by female) is open cup made of grass , weeds , moss , lined with fine dry grass .
47  nests built above ground usually larger and more bulky , with more twigs used in outer walls .
