0 four closely related north american bird formsthe eastern myrtle warbler (ssp coronata), its western counterpart , audubon's warbler (ssp group auduboni), the northwest mexican black-fronted warbler (ssp nigrifrons), and the guatemalan goldman's warbler (ssp goldmani)are periodically lumped as the yellow-rumped warbler (setophaga coronata) .
1 in summer , adult females have streaked backs of black on blue-green and conspicuous yellow patches on the crown , flank , and rump .
2  this individual is a myrtle warbler , as shown by the white throat .
3 classificationsince 1973, the american ornithologists' union has elected to merge these passerine birds as one species .
4  the myrtle form was apparently separated from the others by glaciation during the pleistocene , and the audubon's form may have originated more recently through hybridization between the myrtle warbler and the mexican nigrifrons form .
5 [2]distributionsummer adult male yellow-rumped warblers have slate-blue backs and yellow crowns (barely visible here) .
6  as a male myrtle warbler , this individual has a black "mask" .
7 the yellow-rumped warbler breeds from eastern north america west to the pacific , and southward from there into western mexico .
8  "goldman's" yellow-rumped warbler is endemic to the highlands of guatemala .
9  the myrtle and audubon's forms are migratory , traveling to the southern u.s.
11 , mexico , central america , and the caribbean for winters .
12  among warblers it is by far the most widespread in north america in winter , and in the northern and central parts of the continent , it is among the last to leave in the fall and among the first to return .
13  it is an occasional vagrant to the british isles and iceland .
14 habitatyellow-rumped warblers spend the breeding season in mature coniferous and mixed coniferous-deciduous woodlands (such as in patches of aspen , birch , or willow) .
15  in the western u.s.
17  and in the central appalachian mountains , they are found mostly in mountainous areas .
18  in the pacific northwest and the northeastern u.s.
20 , they occur all the way down to sea level wherever conifers are present .
21  during winter , yellow-rumped warblers find open areas with fruiting shrubs or scattered trees , such as parks , streamside woodlands , open pine and pine-oak forest , dunes (where bayberries are common), and residential areas .
22  on their tropical wintering grounds they live in mangroves , thorn scrub , pine-oak-fir forests , and shade coffee plantations .
23 [3]descriptionthis is a mid-sized new world warbler , though it is one of the largest species in the setophaga genus (formerly dendroica) which comprises a lion's share of the species in the family .
24  in total length , the species can range from 12 to 15 cm (4.7 to 5.9 in) long , with a wingspan of 19 to 24 cm (7.5 to 9.4 in) .
25  body mass can vary from 9.9 to 17.7 g (0.35 to 0.62 oz), though averages between 11 and 14 g (0.39 and 0.49 oz) .
26  among standard measurements , the wing chord is 6.3 to 8.4 cm (2.5 to 3.3 in), the tail is 5 to 6.6 cm (2.0 to 2.6 in), the bill is 0.8 to 1.1 cm (0.31 to 0.43 in) and the tarsus is 1.8 to 2.2 cm (0.71 to 0.87 in) .
27 [4] in summers , males of both forms have streaked backs of black on slate blue , white wing patches , a streaked breast , and conspicuous yellow patches on the crown , flank , and rump .
28  audubon's warbler also sports a yellow throat patch , while the myrtle warbler has a white throat and eye stripe , and a contrasting black cheek patch .
29  females of both forms are more dull , with brown streaking front and back , but still have noticeable yellow rumps .
30  goldman's warbler , of guatemala , resembles audubon's but has a white lower border to the yellow throat and otherwise darker plumage; males replace the slate blue of audubon's with black .
31 behaviorthese birds are one of north america's most abundant neotropical migrants .
32  they are primarily insectivorous .
33  the species is perhaps the most versatile foragers of all warblers .
34  beyond gleaning from leaves like other new world warblers , they often flit , flycatcher-like , out from their perches in short loops , to catch flying insects .
35  other places yellow-rumped warblers have been spotted foraging include picking at insects on washed-up seaweed at the beach , skimming insects from the surface of rivers and the ocean , picking them out of spiderwebs , and grabbing them off piles of manure .
36  common foods include caterpillars and other larvae , leaf beetles , bark beetles , weevils , ants , scale insects , aphids , grasshoppers , caddisflies , craneflies , and gnats , as well as spiders .
37  they also eat spruce budworm , a serious forest pest , during outbreaks .
38 [3]when bugs are scarce , the myrtle warbler also eats fruit , including the wax-myrtle berries which gave it its name .
39  it is the only warbler able to digest such waxy material .
40  the ability to use these fruits allows it to winter farther north than other warblers , sometimes as far north as newfoundland .
41  other commonly eaten fruits include juniper berries , poison ivy , poison oak , greenbrier , grapes , virginia creeper and dogwood .
42  they eat wild seeds such as from beach grasses and goldenrod , and they may come to feeders , where they'll take sunflower seeds , raisins , peanut butter , and suet .
43  on their wintering grounds in mexico they've been seen sipping the sweet honeydew liquid excreted by aphids .
44  male yellow-rumped warblers tend to forage higher in the trees than females do .
45  while foraging with other warbler species , they sometimes aggressively displace other species , including pine warblers and blackburnian warblers .
46 [3]they nest in coniferous and mixed woodlands , and lay 45 eggs .
47  females build the nest , sometimes using material the male carries to her .
48  the nest is a cup of twigs , pine needles , grasses , and rootlets .
49  she may also use moose , horse , and deer hair , moss , and lichens .
50  she lines this cup with fine hair and feathers , sometimes woven into the nest in such a way that they curl up and over the eggs .
51  the nest takes about 10 days to build .
52  nests are located on the horizontal branch of a conifer , anywhere from 1.2 to 15 m (3.9 to 49.2 ft) high .
53  tree species include hemlock , spruce , white cedar , pine , douglas-fir , and larch or tamarack .
54  they may build their nests far out on a main branch or tuck it close to the trunk in a secure fork of two or more branches .
55  occasionally nest are built in a deciduous tree such as a maple , oak or birch .
56  the eggs are incubated for 12 to 13 days .
57  nestlings are helpless and naked at hatching but grow quickly .
58  the young are brooded for 10 to 14 days , at which point they can fledge .
59 [3]the yellow-rumped warbler has a trill-like song of 47 syllables (tyew-tyew-tyew-tyew ,tew-tew-tew) and an occasional check or chip call note .
