0 the orchard oriole (icterus spurius) is the smallest north american species of icterid blackbird .
1  the subspecies of the caribbean coast of mexico , i .
2  s .
3  fuertesi , is sometimes considered a separate species , the ochre oriole .
4 descriptionclose view of an orchard oriolethis species is 6.3 in (16 cm) long and weighs 20 g (0.71 oz) .
5  the bill is pointed and black with some blue-gray at the base of the lower mandible (howell and webb 1995) .
6  the adult male of the nominate subspecies has chestnut on the underparts , shoulder , and rump , with the rest of the plumage black .
7  in the subspecies i .
8  s .
9  fuertesi , the chestnut is replaced with ochre (howell and webb 1995) .
10  the adult female and the juvenile of both subspecies have olive-green on the upper parts and yellowish on the breast and belly .
11  all adults have pointed bills and white wing bars .
12  (orchard orioles are considered to be adults after their second year .
13 ) one-year-old males are yellow-greenish with a black bib .
14 habitat and rangethe breeding habitat is semi-open areas with deciduous trees .
15  i .
16  s .
17  spurius breeds in spring across eastern north america from near the canadaunited states border south to central mexico .
18  a 2009 study also found breeding in the thorn forest of baja california sur and the coast of sinaloa during the summer "monsoon"; this region had previously been thought to be only a migratory stopover (rohwer , hobson , and rohwer , 2009) .
19  i .
20  s .
21  fuertesi breeds from southern tamaulipas to veracruz (howell and webb 1995) .
22  these birds enjoy living in shaded trees within parks along lakes and streams .
23  the nest is a tightly woven pouch attached to a fork on a horizontal branch .
24  their nests tend to sit close together .
25 the nominate subspecies' winter range extends from the coastal lowlands of central sinaloa and southern veracruz south to northern colombia and northwestern venezuela (scharf and kren 1996) .
26  the ochre subspecies has been observed in winter on the pacific slope of mexico (howell and webb 1995) .
27 nominate orchard orioles depart from their winter habitats in march and april and arrive in their breeding habitats from late april to late may .
28  usually , they leave their breeding territories in late july and early august and arrive on their winter territories in mid august .
29  these birds are nocturnal migrants .
30 while in breeding season , they eat insects and spiders .
31  when the season changes , their diet also includes ripe fruit , which quickly passes through their digestive tract .
32  during the winter , their diet consists of fruit , nectar , insects and seeds .
33 behaviorwhen in flight , orchard orioles generally swoop close to the ground and fly at or below treetop levelduring courtship , females display themselves in three ways .
34  the first is by bowing their head and torso toward the male .
35  seesawing , the second courtship display , involves repetitively alternating lowering and raising the head and tail .
36  the third display is begging , which is fast-paced fluttering of wings halfway extended , followed by a high whistle .
37 the orchard oriole swaps the typical flame-orange of other orioles for a deep , burnished russet .
38  hopping among riverine shrubs or scattered trees , male orchard orioles sing a whistled , chattering song to attract yellow-green females .
39  the smallest of north americas orioles , it gleans insects from foliage and builds hanging , pouchlike nests during its brief breeding season , and then heads back to central america for the rest of the year .
40  orchard orioles also feed on fruit and nectar in orchards , gardens , and elsewhere .
41 size & shapeorchard orioles are slim songbirds , larger than warblers and vireos .
42  they have medium-length tails , rounded heads , and a straight , sharply pointed bill .
43 color patternadult males are black above and rich reddish-chestnut below .
44  they have a black head and throat , with a reddish-chestnut patch at the bend of the wing .
45  females are greenish yellow with two white wing bars and no black .
46  immature males look like females , but have black around the bill and throat .
47 behaviororchard orioles forage for insects in the tops of trees .
48  they also drink nectar from flowers and , in fall , eat berries and other fruits .
49  they sometimes visit hummingbird feeders or eat orange slices or jelly at feeding stations .
50 habitatorchard orioles spend summers in open woodlands and areas of scattered trees across the eastern united states and southern canada .
51  look for them along river edges , in pastures with scattered trees , and in parks and orchards .
