0 the hooded oriole (icterus cucullatus) is a medium-sized new world oriole .
1 description and ecologyadults have a curved bill which is completely black and white wing bars .
2  the adult male has a deep yellowish orange head with black on the face and throat; they are black on the back , wings and tail , orange on the underparts .
3  the adult female is olive-green on the upper parts , yellowish on the breast and belly .
4  their calls consist of whistling and wheets , while their song is a mixture of both .
5 juvenile in california , united statestheir breeding habitat is open areas with trees , especially palms , across the southwestern united states and northern mexico .
6  the nest is a tightly woven pouch attached to the underside of a leaf or tree branch .
7  sometimes their nest is filled with the egg of a brown-headed cowbird which is parasite bird that lays its eggs in other birds nests for that species to take care of .
8 these birds migrate in flocks south to mexico's southwestern coast; they are permanent residents in baja california sur , the mexican east coast , and belize .
9  some may over-winter near feeders .
10  they can also be found in southern california neighborhoods , but are rare in the winter .
11 they forage in trees and shrubs , also feeding from flowers .
12  it is a nectar robber because it pierces the base of the flower , and does not assist in pollination .
13  these birds mainly eat insects , nectar and fruit , and will also visit hummingbird feeders and bird feeders for seeds .
14 conservation statusdeclined sharply in southern texas in recent decades , perhaps owing to cowbird parasitism .
15  may be making a slight comeback in that area .
16  still fairly common farther west .
17 familyblackbirds and orioleshabitatopen woods , shade trees , palms .
18  breeds in groves of trees (such as cottonwood , walnut , sycamore) along streams and in canyons , and in open woods in lowlands .
19  often common in suburbs and city parks .
20  especially favors palm trees , and will nest in isolated groups of palms even in cities .
21 in the hot lowlands of the southwest , this slim oriole is often common in the trees along streams and in suburbs .
22  it is especially likely to be seen around palms , frequently attaching its hanging nest to the underside of a palm frond .
23  in yards and gardens it often visits hummingbird feeders to drink the sugar-water .
24  the jumbled , musical song of the male sometimes includes imitations of other birds .
25 photo galleryfeeding behaviorforages rather slowly and deliberately in trees and large shrubs , gleaning insects from among foliage or feeding on berries .
26  regularly probes in flowers for nectar and probably takes insects there as well .
27  a common visitor to hummingbird feeders.4, sometimes 3-5. whitish , irregularly blotched with brown , lavender , and gray .
28  incubation is by female , about 12-14 days .
29  bronzed cowbirds very frequently lay eggs in nests of this species .
30  young: fed by both parents .
31  leave nest about 14 days after hatching .
32  2 broods per year , sometimes 3.youngfed by both parents .
33  leave nest about 14 days after hatching .
34  2 broods per year , sometimes 3.includes insects , berries , nectar .
35  feeds on a variety of insects .
36  may especially favor caterpillars , also eats beetles , wasps , ants , and many others .
37  feeds on many wild berries , and sometimes on cultivated fruit .
38  takes nectar from flowers , and will come to feeders to drink sugar-water .
39 nestingin courtship , male moves around female , posturing with deep bows and then pointing bill straight up while singing softly .
40  female may respond with similar posturing .
41  nest: often placed in palm or large yucca , sewn to underside of large overhanging leaf; usually 10-50' above ground , but can be lower .
42  sometimes placed under banana leaf , in clump of mistletoe or spanish moss , or suspended from branch of deciduous tree .
43  nest is a woven hanging pouch of grass and plant fibers , lined with plant down , hair , feathers .
44  female builds nest , but male may help bring material .
