0 the painted bunting (passerina ciris) is a species of bird in the cardinal family , cardinalidae , that is native to north america .
1  the bright plumage of the male only comes in the second year of life; in the first year they can only be distinguished from the female by close inspection .
2 taxonomythe painted bunting was originally described by carl linnaeus in his eighteenth-century work systema naturae .
3 [2] there are two recognized subspecies of the painted bunting:[3][4]p .
4  c .
5  ciris  (linnaeus , 1758): nominate , breeds in the southeastern united statesp .
6  c .
7  pallidior  mearns , 1911: breeds in south central us and northern mexicofemaledescriptionthe male painted bunting is often described as the most beautiful bird in north america and as such has been nicknamed nonpareil , or "without equal" .
8 [5] its colors , dark blue head , green back , red rump , and underparts , make it extremely easy to identify , but it can still be difficult to spot since it often skulks in foliage even when it is singing .
9  the plumage of female and juvenile painted buntings is green and yellow-green , serving as camouflage .
10  once seen , the adult female is still distinctive , since it is a brighter , truer green than other similar songbirds .
11  adult painted buntings can measure 1214 cm (4.75.5 in) in length , span 2123 cm (8.39.1 in) across the wings and weigh 1319 g (0.460.67 oz) .
12 [6][7]distribution and habitatthe painted bunting occupies typical habitat for a member of its family .
13  it is found in thickets , woodland edges with riparian thickets , shrubbery and brushy areas .
14  in the east , the species breeds in maritime hammocks and scrub communities .
15  today , it is often found along roadsides and in suburban areas , and in gardens with dense , shrubby vegetation .
16  the wintering habitat is typically the shrubby edges along the border of tropical forests or densely vegetated savanna .
17 [8] the breeding range is divided into two geographically separate areas .
18  these include southern arizona , southern new mexico , southern and eastern texas , oklahoma , arkansas , louisiana , northern florida , coastal georgia , the southern coast and inland waterways such as the santee river of south carolina and northern mexico .
19 [1] they winter in south florida , cuba , the bahamas , along both coasts of mexico and through much of central america .
20  occasionally , they may be vagrants further north , including to new york[9][10] pennsylvania[11] and new jersey .
21 [12] the bird is also found every few years as far north as new brunswick , canada .
22 [13]behaviorpainted buntings are shy , secretive and often difficult to observe for the human eye , though can be fairly approachable where habituated to bird feeders .
23  males sing in spring from exposed perches to advertise their territories .
24  they also engage in visual displays including flying bouncingly like a butterfly or in an upright display , body-fluff display , bow display and wing-quiver display .
25  these displays are used in agonistic conflicts with other males or in breeding displays for females , with females rarely engaging in displays .
26  occasionally , males may physically clash with each other and may even kill each other in such conflicts .
27 [6] when their breeding season has concluded , buntings migrate by night over short to medium distances .
28  western birds (arizona and northern mexico) molt in mid-migration , while eastern birds tend to molt before they migrate .
29 [8]feedingpainted buntings often feed by hopping along the ground , cautiously stopping every few moments to look around .
30  the painted bunting regularly eats a large quantity of grass seeds , including; panicum , amaranthus , oxalis , euphorbia and carex .
31  seeds are eaten almost exclusively during winter .
32  while breeding , painted bunting and nestlings mainly eat small invertebrates , including; spiders , snails , grasshoppers , caterpillars and other insects .
33  they have been known to regularly visit spider webs to pick off small insects caught in them .
34 [8]breedingpainted buntings are mostly monogamous and are solitary or in pairs during the breeding season , but sometimes exhibit polygyny .
35  the breeding season begins in late april and lasts through to early august , with activity peaking mid-may through to mid-july .
36  the male arrives about a week before the female and starts to establish a small territory .
37  the nest is typically hidden in low , dense vegetation and is built by the females and woven into the surrounding vegetation for strength .
38 [8] each brood contains three or four gray-white eggs , often spotted with brown , which are incubated for around 10 days until the altricial young are hatched .
39  the female alone cares for the young .
40  the hatchlings are brooded for approximately 12 to 14 days and then fledge at that time .
41  about 30 days after the first eggs hatch , the female painted bunting usually lays a second brood .
42 [8] nests are often parasitized by cowbirds .
43 [8] common predators at the nest of eggs , young , and brooding females are large snakes , including coachwhip snakes , eastern kingsnakes , eastern racers and black rat snakes .
44 [8] bird-hunting raptors , including short-tailed hawks , accipiter hawks , and even the small passerine loggerhead shrike , may hunt painted buntings , including the conspicuous breeding-plumaged male .
45  the painted bunting can live to over 10 years of age , though most wild buntings probably live barely half that long .
46 [8]statusthe male painted bunting was once a very popular caged bird , but its capture and holding is currently illegal .
47 [14] trapping for overseas sale may still occur in central america .
48 [8] populations are primarily declining due to habitat being lost to development , especially in coastal swamp thickets and woodland edges in the east and riparian habitats in migration and winter in the southeastern united states and mexico .
49 [8] they are categorized as near threatened by the iucn[1] and are protected by the u.s.
51  migratory bird act .
