0 the bullock's oriole (icterus bullockii) is a small new world blackbird .
1  at one time , this species and the baltimore oriole were considered to be a single species , the northern oriole .
2 [2][3] this bird was named after william bullock , an english amateur naturalist .
3 descriptionbullock's orioles are sexually dimorphic , with males being more brightly colored than females .
4  in addition , adult males tend to be slightly larger and heavier than females .
5  in general , adults range in mass from 29 to 43 g (1.0 to 1.5 oz) .
6  adults have a pointed bill with a straight culmen .
7  in adult males , the tail is long , square , and jet black .
8  all exposed skin is black , as are the claws and bill , though the base of the lower mandible lightens to bluish-gray .
9 adult males are characterized by strongly contrasting orange and black plumage , a black throat patch and a white wing bar .
10  the underparts , breast , and face are orange or yellow; by contrast , the back , wings , and tail are black .
11  a black line extends from each eye to the black crown .
12  the wing coverts (feathers not directly used in flight) are fringed white , forming a wing patch .
13  although the tail is mostly black , the outermost three or four retrices (flight feathers) are tipped orange , forming a t shape .
14  adult females , by contrast , have gray-brown upperparts , duller yellow on the breast and underparts , and an olive crown .
15  some females may also have a dark throat patch , similar (but less extensive) to the one found in adult males; in all cases females lack the black eye-line present in adult males .
16  it is hypothesized that females with throat patches are older individuals .
17 following the general pattern observed among icterids , the overall plumage pattern seen in immature male bullock's orioles closely resembles that seen in adult females .
18  juveniles resemble adult females but have darker wings , fresh wing coverts , and a pink or whitish bill .
19  sexual dimorphism is not obvious in juveniles .
20 reproductionbullock's oriole nests near san jose , cabullock's orioles are seasonally monogamous .
21  the breeding season typically lasts from may until july .
22  the exact timing of the beginning of the breeding season tends to vary geographically: in general , breeding begins later in the northernmost and westernmost portions of its geographic range .
23  mated pairs of bullock's orioles cooperate to weave deep , pendant baskets in which are deposited between three and six eggs , though females tend to do much of the work .
24  the nest is woven of plant fibers , primarily bark and fine grass fiber , though animal hair is also commonly used .
25  the nest is lined with down , hair , and moss .
26 both males and females rear the young and defend the nest from predators and nest parasites .
27 bullock's orioles and baltimore orioles typically hybridize in the midwest where their geographic ranges overlap .
28 communicationboth males and females sing .
29  while males have a sweeter voice , females tend to be more prolific singers .
30  this bird's song is similar to that of the baltimore oriole , but faster and somewhat more harsh .
31 distributionbullock's orioles are native to western north america , though according to jaramillo (1999) they are sometimes found as vagrants in the eastern half of the continent .
32 [4] during the breeding season , they are found as far west as the eastern foothills of the cascade range .
33  their breeding range stretches east to the dakotas , kansas , and northern central texas .
34 [4] this species can be found as far north as british columbia in canada and as far south as sonora or durango in mexico .
35 [4][5] it is common throughout its range , but is absent in parts of arizona and idaho where a combination of extreme elevation and an arid climate make for poor living conditions .
36 [5] during winter , this species retreats to mexico and northern central america .
37  its winter range extends south and east from sinaloa to oaxaca .
38 [4]behaviorhabitatlike other members of icteridae , bullock's orioles prefer habitat edges .
39  they especially prefer riparian corridors , open deciduous woodland , and scrub forest .
40 [4] observations during the breeding season indicate that members of this species prefer areas with an abundance of cottonwood , pecan , and (if near water) willow .
41 [4][5] in dry areas , this species prefers salt cedar and mesquite .
42 [5] in california , eucalyptus trees are used as major sources of nectar .
43 [4][5]these birds forage in trees and shrubs , also making short flights to catch insects .
44  they mainly eat insects , berries , and nectar .
45  in some locations , they may be seen using hummingbird feeders .
46 these birds will readily come to a dish filled with grape jelly .
47  their parents lead the fledglings , feed them jelly and then the adult males leave the area .
48  the young stay at the jelly dish from first feeding in early july and leave late september .
49 related speciesa member of the northern oriole group , bullock's orioles were once considered to be conspecific with baltimore orioles and black-backed orioles .
50  however , recent phylogenetic data suggest that bullock's orioles are members of a distinct species that does not share a most-recent common ancestor with baltimore orioles , as was once assumed .
