0 the white-crowned sparrow (zonotrichia leucophrys) is a medium-sized sparrow native to north america .
1 descriptionadults are 18 cm (7 in) long and have black and white stripes on their head , a gray face , brown streaked upper parts and a long tail .
2  the wings are brown with bars and the underparts are gray .
3  their bill is pink or yellow .
4  they are similar in appearance to the white-throated sparrow , but do not have the white throat markings or yellow lores .
5 subspeciesin california , united statesthere are five currently recognized subspecies of white-crowned sparrow (pugetensis , gambelii , nuttalli , oriantha , and leucophrys), varying in breeding distribution migratory route .
6  birds of the subspecies nutalli are permanent residents in california , while birds of the subspecies gambelli may migrate as far as the arctic circle during the summer breeding season .
7  northern birds migrate to the southern united states .
8 distributiontheir breeding habitat is brushy areas across northern canada and the western united states .
9 the white-crowned sparrow is a very rare vagrant to western europe .
10 [2] it has been sighted in england , scotland ,[2][3] ireland ,[4] and norway .
11 [5]in 2008 a white-crowned sparrow was spotted in cley next the sea in norfolk .
12 [6] to commemorate the event an image of the bird was included in a window at st margaret's church .
13 depiction of a white-crowned sparrow in window in st margaret's church , cley next the sea , norfolk .
14 behaviorthese birds forage on the ground or in low vegetation , but sometimes make short flights to catch flying insects .
15  they mainly eat seeds , other plant parts and insects .
16  in winter , they often forage in flocks .
17 white-crowned sparrows nest either low in bushes or on the ground under shrubs and lay three to five brown-marked gray or greenish-blue eggs .
18 the white-crowned sparrow is known for its natural alertness mechanism , which allows it to stay awake for up to two weeks during migration .
19 [7] this effect has been studied for possible human applications , such as shift-work drowsiness or truck driving .
20 [8][9][10]white-crowned sparrows appear each winter over much of north america to grace our gardens and favorite trails (they live in parts of the west year-round) .
21  the smart black-and-white head , pale beak , and crisp gray breast combine for a dashing look  and make it one of the surest sparrow identifications in north america .
22  watch for flocks of these sparrows scurrying through brushy borders and overgrown fields , or coax them into the open with backyard feeders .
23  as spring approaches , listen out for this birds thin , sweet whistle .
24 size & shapethe white-crowned sparrow is a large sparrow with a small bill and a long tail .
25  the head can look distinctly peaked or smooth and flat , depending on the birds attitude .
26 color patternfirst impressions of white-crowned sparrows tend to be of a plain , pale-gray bird; next your eye is drawn to the very bold black-and-white stripes on the head and the pale pink or yellow bill .
27  learn this bird's size and shape so you're ready to identify young birds that have brown , not black , markings on the head .
28 behavioryoull see white-crowned sparrows low at the edges of brushy habitat , hopping on the ground or on branches usually below waist level .
29  theyre also found in open ground (particularly on their breeding grounds) but typically with the safety of shrubs or trees nearby .
30 habitatlook for white-crowned sparrows in places where safe tangles of brush mix with open or grassy ground for foraging .
31  for much of the united states , white-crowned sparrows are most likely in winter (although two races live year round in the west , along the coast and in the mountains) .
