0 the violet-green swallow (tachycineta thalassina) is a small north american passerine bird in the swallow family .
1  these aerial insectivores are distributed along the west coast from alaska to mexico , extending as far east as montana and texas .
2  with an appearance very similar to the tree swallow , these individuals can be identified by the white rump side-patches that appear to separate their green back and purple tail .
3  violet-green swallows are secondary cavity nesters , found in a number of habitats including deciduous and coniferous forests .
4  in addition to nesting in tree holes within these habitats , they are also widely observed nesting in the cracks of large cliffs .
5 ==description==the distinct body form of swallows distinguishes them from other passerine birds .
6  their long pointed wings and slim , streamlined body evolved to catch insects while in flight .
7  the body of the violet-green swallow is no exception .
8  with an average body length of 5 in .
9  (13 cm), the violet-green swallow is slightly shorter and appears more compact in flight compared to other members of the hirundinidae family .
10  the violet-green swallow most closely resembles the north american tree swallow , but can be distinguished by its shorter wings and colouration .
11 ===colouration===the violet-green swallow gets its name from the colouration on its back and rump .
12  the species is best identified by the glossy green on the top of the head and back as well as hints of purple on the nape , rump and upper tail .
13  below the green back , the remainder of the wing is a grayish-bronze .
14  similar to other swallows , t .
15  thalassina is white below , but differs in that the white continues onto rump side-patches that almost meet at the base of the tail .
16  these white rump side-patches sometimes look like one continuous stripe when in flight .
17  white also extends onto the cheeks , partially surrounding the eye .
18  the notch in the tail of the violet-green swallow is slightly shallower than that of the tree swallow , but deeper than the relatively flat tail of the cliff swallow .
19 violet-green swallows exhibit very little sexual dimorphism , with adult males simply showing brighter colours than adult females .
20  additionally , the white cheeks are not as prominent and the head is more bronze than green on the female .
21  juveniles are not as easily identifiable compared to adults due to their dull colouration .
22  similar to other juvenile swallows , especially the tree swallow , the juvenile violet-green swallow is white below and grayish-brown above .
23  however , the more gradual change in colour and visible (but slightly reduced) white cheek patches can help identify juvenile individuals of the species .
24 ===standard measurements=====taxonomy==the  swallows have been well studied ecologically , but only recently has their phylogeny been thoroughly researched .
25  swallows are passerine birds grouped within the family hirundinidae .
26  the family hirundinidae is split into two subfamilies: pseudochelidoninae , which contains two species of river martins , and hirundininae , comprising all other martins and swallows .
27  the 82 species within the subfamily hirundininae are further classified into three groupings: the mud nesters , basal relicts and core martins , with the violet-green swallow falling into the latter .
28  violet-green swallows are one of 9 species of new world tree swallows within the genus tachycineta .
29  this genus is a monophyletic group and is considered the sister taxa of all other new world swallows .
30  violet-green swallows are important members of the tachycineta clade due to their large geographic range and because they are one of 2 species that breed within north america .
31  it is agreed upon that tachycineta is split into a north and south american clade , but the phylogenetic placement within the genus depends on the type of analysis used .
32  the violet-green swallow is a member of the north american grouping , along with t .
33  bicolor (the north american tree swallow), t .
34  euchrysea (the golden swallow of hispaniola and jamaica) and t .
35  cyaneoviridis (the bahama swallow) .
36  a mitochondrial genome analysis has placed t .
37  thalassina as a sister taxon of the caribbean swallows , t .
38  euchrysea and t .
39  cyaneoviridis , with all 3 species forming a sister clade to t .
40  bicolor .
41  nuclear genome analyses and a consensus of both methods have reorganized this north american clade , alternating the closest sister taxon of t .
42  thalassina between t .
43  cyaneoviridis and t .
44  euchrysea .
45  nonetheless , the taxonomy of the violet-green swallow is well understood up to the genus level , after which some uncertainty surrounds the placement of t .
46  thalassina within the north american clade of the tachycineta genus .
47 ===subspecies===violet-green swallows are divided into three subspecies , t .
48  t .
49  thalassina , t .
50  t .
51  brachyptera and t .
52  t .
53  lepida differing in breeding ranges and wing length .
54  t .
55  t .
56  thalassina has slightly longer wings and has been known to breed as far north as alaska , while the shorter winged t .
57  t .
58  brachyptera breeds further south in california and mexico .
59  not all of the literature agrees upon t .
60  t .
61  lepida as a 3rd subspecies , and little information is available to help distinguish it from other subspecies .
62 ===hybridization===hybridization has been known to occur among the swallows , with a few cases involving violet-green swallows being reported .
63  breeding between violet-green swallows and both tree and barn swallows has been recorded on separate occasions , but resulting offspring were not observed .
64  in 2000, the strange plumage of a swallow seen in british columbia , canada suggested the possible successful hybridization of a violet-green and cliff swallow .
65  nonetheless , these observations are rare hence why minimal research has looked into swallow hybridization .
66 ==habitat==the type of habitat occupied by violet-green swallows varies depending on their geographical location and elevation .
67  across their range , these birds can be found in deciduous , coniferous and mixed forests , as well as within canyons and in close proximity to large cliffs .
68  breeding and non-breeding habitats do not differ much except that breeding habitat is usually at lower elevations .
69  violet-green swallows have also been observed nesting around buildings in more settled areas .
70 ==distribution==violet-green swallows are a predominantly western species , with the rare sighting of individuals in eastern north america .
71  the distribution of the species can be divided based on the recognized subspecies , but the entire range spans from central alaska down to mexico .
72  longitudinally , the range borders the west coast of alaska , british columbia and the united states , and extends eastward into southwestern alberta , montana , the dakotas and texas .
73  the breeding range spans almost the entire distribution , while the winter range is restricted to mexico .
74 ==behaviour=====vocalizations===there are many knowledge gaps surrounding the vocalization behaviour of violet-green swallows .
75  these gaps include vocalizations made during early development , alarm calls and the daily pattern of calls .
76  the little information available suggests two main classes of vocalizations , the chee-chee calls and twitter calls .
77 ====chee-chee calls====this call is most commonly heard when one violet-green swallow interacts with another swallow , either during foraging , in-flight chases or when approaching a nesting site .
78  flocks of swallows have been recorded making chee-chee calls , suggesting its use in social cohesion .
79  juveniles have also been observed making this vocalization when waiting to be fed by an adult , implying that it plays a role in parent-juvenile recognition .
80 ====twitter calls====observations of violet-green swallows making twitter calls typically associate the vocalization with courtship displays and the establishment of new territories .
81  twitter calls have only been heard in flight , either by a male escorting a female or during brief intraspecific territorial disputes .
82  mixing of the two calls occurs occasionally , but little ecological research can explain its use .
83 ===diet===similar to other swallows , violet-green swallows are specialized aerial insectivores , catching and eating their prey while in flight .
84  however , they have been known to feed higher in the sky than most other swallows .
85 the examination of the stomach contents of multiple individuals has presented a wide range of diet items , including insects like ants , beetles and flies as well as other arthropods such as spiders .
86   on rare occurrences these birds have been observed foraging along the ground , but such events represent exceptions to their typical feeding habits .
87 ===reproduction===violet-green swallows will usually arrive to their breeding area weeks prior to the start of reproduction .
88  location dependent , copulation takes place mid-may with the eggs being laid by the start of june , followed by a couple weeks of incubation before hatching .
89  the average clutch size is 5 eggs , with females laying approximately 1 per day .
90  during the weeks post-hatching , their parents feed the young as they slowly begin to grow their feathers .
91  after approximately 3 weeks the young are ready to leave the nest .
92  it is more common for pairs to reproduce once per breeding season , but a second brooding has been observed on occasion .
93 ====nesting sites====violet-green swallows are secondary cavity nesters , meaning they typically nest in natural holes or previously occupied nests .
94  some breeding pairs will even go as far as usurping nests from other species .
95  a majority of violet-green swallow nests are in tree holes excavated by other animals or within the cracks of large cliffs .
96  due to their dependence on large trees , violet-green swallows are highly impacted by forest management practices .
97  in addition to nesting in natural cavities , violet-green swallows have also been observed occupying artificial nest boxes .
98  pairs typically breed in independent nests , except on cliffs where large colonies can be found nesting together .
99 ====interspecific egg-dumping====violet-green swallows have been observed cooperating and competing with various avian species , including western bluebirds .
100  a similar field observation notes a violet-green swallow laying an egg in an active bluebird nest box .
101  initially , the male bluebird attempted to drive the swallow from the nest cavity , while the female bluebird did not seem concerned with the intruder .
102  it appeared the bluebirds tolerated the act of egg-dumping by the violet-green swallow , but the observer returned the following day to find the newly laid egg smashed below the nest .
103  this behaviour suggests that when unable to access her original nest after physiologically committing to laying her egg , a female violet-green swallow may participate in interspecific egg-dumping .
104 ====intraspecific paternity-defence====violet-green swallows are secondary cavity nesters and aerial insectivores , making males susceptible to nest and mate competition .
105  to avoid being cuckolded , males spend more time guarding their mate than their nest , contrary to tree swallows .
106  this paternity-defence behaviour emphasizes that non-territorial violet-green swallows exhibit greater mate competition than nesting site competition .
107 ===interspecific cooperation===multiple accounts of violet-green swallows forming cooperative relationships with other species have been recorded .
108  from 1981 to 1982, three independent swallow pairs were observed co-occupying the nest boxes of western bluebirds .
109  these violet-green swallows protected the nesting site , removed fecal sacs from the boxes and fed the bluebird fledglings with no resistance from the adult western bluebirds .
110  despite too small of a sample size to hold statistical significance , fledgling survival was greater when violet-green swallows provided active care .
111  it is believed that the swallows benefit from the cooperative relationship by inheriting the nest box after the bluebird parents and fledglings have left .
112 ===interspecific competition===similar to the occasional observation of violet-green swallows building interspecific cooperative relationships , they have also been involved in interspecific competition for nesting sites .
113  one example from 1974, noted the competitive behaviour between mountain chickadees and violet-green swallows .
114  the physical altercation began when a pair of swallows attempted to overtake a nesting site occupied by a pair of chickadees and their fledglings .
115  after multiple aerial battles , the chickadees regained control of their nest and successfully defended against future violet-green swallow attacks .
116  the same field observer noted a similar altercation between violet-green swallows and hairy woodpeckers , which resulted in the same outcome .
117  these species are permanent residents , allowing them first choice of nesting sites , while the violet-green swallows are summer residents with late breeding habits .
118  thus , a scarcity of viable nesting sites may lead to this interspecific competitive behaviour in violet-green swallows .
119  a similar observation of competitive behaviour for potential nesting sites has been observed between acorn woodpeckers and violet-green swallows .
120 ===torpor===it has been speculated that certain birds , including swallows , enter a state of torpidity during harsh winter conditions .
121  few observations of this decrease in body temperature and metabolic rate have been recorded in violet-green swallows , the first case occurring in 1965 near death valley national monument in saratoga springs , california .
122  field observers noted 3 dead individuals on the east-facing slope of a dune the morning after a cold and windy night .
123  upon closer observation , the violet-green swallows made minor movements , such as opening their eyes , but did not struggle while being handled .
124  the physical appearance of the swallows , including the position of their head in relation to the slope and the fluffing of their feathers was similar to that of other birds in torpor .
125  despite the lack of thermometers , it was apparent these 3 individuals were in a state of hypothermia for about 45 minutes after the sun began to rise .
126  eventually the 3 swallows awkwardly flew off , signifying the end of their torpor bout .
127 ===ectoparasite control=======sunbathing====in addition to reaching borderline hypothermic temperatures during bouts of torpor , violet-green swallows have been observed behaving similar to hyperthermic individuals while sunbathing .
128  indications of this activity include the orientation of their wings and tail , their trance-like state and the occasional loss of balance .
129  research has shown that increasing feather temperatures during basking can control ectoparasites .
130  the period of sunbathing in violet-green swallows is short and dependent on ambient temperature and wind velocity , but typically occurs after an increase in parasite loads near the end of nesting .
