0 the bank swallow nests in colonies in streamside banks across much of north america .
1  it can also be found across most of europe and asia .
2 adult descriptionsmall slender songbird .
3 white underneath and brown on top .
4 dark band across chest , extending down middle of chest .
5 small bill .
6 long wings .
7 immature descriptionsimilar to adult , but with pale edging to back feathers .
8 conservation statuslocal populations vary with availability of good colony sites .
9  loss of such sites may be contributing to long-term declines in overall numbers .
10 familyswallowshabitatnear water; fields , marshes , streams , lakes .
11  typically seen feeding in flight over (or near) water at all seasons , even in migration .
12  nests in colonies in vertical banks of dirt or sand , usually along rivers or ponds , seldom away from water .
13 the smallest of our swallows , the bank swallow is usually seen in flocks , flying low over ponds and rivers with quick , fluttery wingbeats .
14  it nests in dense colonies , in holes in dirt or sand banks .
15  some of these colonies are quite large , and a tall cut bank may be pockmarked with several hundred holes .
16  despite their small size , tiny bills , and small feet , these swallows generally dig their own nesting burrows , sometimes up to five feet long .
17 photo galleryinsects .
18  feeds on a wide variety of flying insects .
19  eats many flies (including house flies and crane flies), beetles , wasps , winged ants , small bees , and true bugs , plus some dragonflies , stoneflies , moths , caterpillars , and others .
20 nestingalmost always nests in colonies in vertical banks of sand or dirt; may be along riverbanks , lake shores , road cuts , gravel pits , or similar sites .
21  often dense colonies , with entrances to holes no more than a foot apart .
22  all the pairs in a colony may be synchronized in timing of their nesting activities .
23  nest site is in burrow excavated in steep bank .
24  both sexes help dig burrow , beginning by clinging to bank and digging with bill , later crawling inside burrow and kicking out dirt with feet .
25  burrows usually 2-3' long , sometimes 1-5' long .
26  nest at end of horizontal burrow is made of grass , weeds , rootlets , with a lining of feathers added after eggs are laid .
