0 the carolina chickadee (poecile carolinensis) is a small passerine bird in the tit family paridae .
1  it is often placed in the genus parus with most other tits , but mtdna cytochrome b sequence data and morphology suggest that separating poecile more adequately expresses these birds' relationships (gill et al .
2 , 2005) .
3  the american ornithologists' union has been treating poecile as distinct genus for some time already .
4 ==description==adults are {convert|11.5||13|cm|in|abbr=on} long with a weight of {convert|9||12|g|oz|abbr=on}, and have a black cap and bib with white sides to the face .
5  their underparts are white with rusty brown on the flanks; their back is grey .
6  they have a short dark bill , short wings and a moderately long tail .
7  very similar to the black-capped chickadee , the carolina chickadee is distinguished by the slightly browner wing with the greater coverts brown (not whitish fringed) and the white fringing on the secondary feathers slightly less conspicuous; the tail is also slightly shorter and more square-ended .
8  ==vocalization==the calls and song also differ subtly to an experienced ear: the carolina chickadee's chick-a-dee call is faster and higher pitched than that of the black-capped chickadee , and the carolina chickadee has a four note fee-bee-fee-bay song , whereas the black-capped omits the high notes .
9  identification is very difficult even with an excellent view .
10 the most famous call is the familiar chick-a-dee-dee-dee which gave this bird its name and its song is fee-bee-fee-bay .
11 carolina chickadees are so similar to black-capped chickadees that they themselves have trouble telling their species apart .
12  because of this they sometimes mate producing hybrids .
13  the most obvious difference between the three chickadees is that the carolina chickadee sings four-note song , black-capped sing two-note songs , and the hybrids sing three-note songs .
14 ==distribution and habitat==their breeding habitat is mixed or deciduous woods in the united states from new jersey west to southern kansas and south to florida and texas; there is a gap in the range at high altitudes in the appalachian mountains where they are replaced by their otherwise more northern relative , the black-capped chickadee .
15  they nest in a hole in a tree; the pair excavates the nest , using a natural cavity or sometimes an old woodpecker nest .
16  they may interbreed with black-capped chickadees where the ranges overlap , which can make identification difficult .
17 they are permanent residents , not usually moving south even in severe winter weather .
18 ==diet==these birds hop along tree branches searching for insects , sometimes hanging upside down or hovering; they may make short flights to catch insects in the air .
19  insects form a large part of their diet , especially in summer; seeds and berries become important in winter .
20  they sometimes hammer seeds on a tree or shrub to open them; they also will store seeds for later use .
21 during the fall migration and winter , chickadees often flock together .
22  many other species of birds , including titmice , nuthatches , and warblers can often be found foraging in these flocks .
23  mixed flocks stay together because the chickadees call out whenever they find a good source of food .
24  this calling out forms cohesion for the group , allowing the other birds to find food more efficiently .
25 ==temperature regulation==carolina chickadees are able to lower their body temperatures to induce an intentional state of hypothermia called torpor .
26  they do this to conserve energy during extremely cold winters .
27  in extremely cold weather conditions they look for cavities where they can hide in and spend up to fifteen hours at a time in torpor; during this time they are awake but unresponsive; they should not be picked up and handled at this time , as the stress of being held may cause their death .
