0 the chestnut-backed chickadee (poecile rufescens , formerly parus rufescens) is a small passerine bird in the tit family , paridae .
1 it is found in the pacific northwest of the united states and western canada , from southern alaska to southwestern california .
2  it is a permanent resident within its range , with some seasonal movements as feeding flocks move short distances in search of food .
3  they usually move to lower elevations in the same area upon onset of winter and move back up to higher elevations in late summer .
4 it is a small chickadee , {convert|11.5|-|12.5|cm|abbr = on} long with a weight of {convert|8.5|-|12.6|g|abbr = on} .
5  the head is dark blackish-brown with white cheeks , the mantle is bright rufous-brown , the wing feathers are dark gray with paler fringes .
6  the underparts are white to pale grayish-white , with rufous or pale gray flanks .
7  it is often considered the most handsome of all chickadees .
8  they often move through the forest in mixed feeding flocks , and are often seen in large groups with bushtits and warblers .
9 there are three subspecies , with the flanks being grayer and less rufous further south (del hoyo et al .
10  2007):its habitat is low elevation coniferous and mixed coniferous forests .
11  in the san francisco bay area this bird has readily adapted to suburban settings , prompting a range expansion .
12  it is a cavity-nester , usually utilizing an abandoned woodpecker hole , but sometimes excavating on its own .
13  chestnut-backed chickadees use lots of fur and hair to make their nests .
14  their nests are actually 50% fur and hair .
15  the most common hair they use comes from deer , rabbits , and coyotes .
16  the adult chickadees also make a layer of fur about a centimeter thick which is used to cover the eggs on the nest whenever they leave the nest .
17  it lays 58 (sometimes 9) eggs per clutch .
18 its food is largely insects and other invertebrates gleaned from foliage .
19  chestnut-backed chickadees take some seeds , especially those of conifers , and fruit .
20  it will visit bird feeders , including hummingbird feeders , and especially loves suet .
21 often , it is still placed in the genus parus with most other tits , but mtdna cytochrome b sequence data and morphology suggest that separating poecile more adequately expresses these birds' relationships (gill et al .
22 , 2005) .
23  the american ornithologists' union has been treating poecile as a distinct genus for some time already .
