0 the juniper titmouse (baeolophus ridgwayi) is a passerine bird in the tit family paridae .
1  the american ornithologists' union split the plain titmouse into the oak titmouse and the juniper titmouse in 1996, due to distinct differences in song , preferred habitat , and genetic makeup .
2 the juniper titmouse is a small , gray bird with small tuft or crest .
3  the face is plain , and the undersides are a lighter gray .
4  sexes are similar .
5 this titmouse lives year-round primarily in the great basin , but is resident from southeastern oregon and central colorado south to the eastern mojave desert in california and central arizona , as far as west texas and extreme northeastern sonora , mexico-(the madrean sky islands) .
6  prefers open woodlands of warm , dry pinyon-juniper , juniper and desert riparian woods .
7 juniper titmice will sleep in cavities , dense foliage , or birdhouses .
8  when roosting in foliage , the titmouse chooses a twig surrounded by dense foliage or an accumulation of dead pine needles , simulating a roost in a cavity .
9  it forms pairs or small groups , but does not form large flocks .
10  it may join mixed-species flocks after breeding season for foraging .
11 the juniper titmouse eats insects and spiders , sometimes seen catching insects in mid air .
12  it also takes berries , acorns , and some seeds , sometimes hammering seeds against branches to open them .
13   the bird forages on foliage , twigs , branches , trunks , and occasionally on the ground .
14  strong legs and feet allows it to hang upside down to forage .
15  juniper titmouse is attracted to feeders with suet , peanut butter and sunflower seeds .
16 the song of the juniper titmouse is a rolling series of notes given on the same pitch .
17   its call sounds like a raspy tschick-adee .
18 this species builds its nest in a woodpecker hole , natural cavity , or nest box , lining it with grass , moss , mud , hair , feathers , and fur .
19  it breeds from march into july , with peak activity in april and may , laying 39 eggs , usually 47.  the female is the primary incubator , the process of which takes 1416 days .
20  young are altricial , and are tended by both parents in nest for 1621 days .
21  parents continue to tend to young for another three to four weeks after the young leave the nest .
22 the oak titmouse and juniper titmouse appear almost identical , but differ in voice as well as range .
23  the oak titmouse has a browner back than the juniper titmouse .
24  the oak titmouse gives a repeated series of three to seven syllables , each composed of one low and one high note , while the juniper titmouse song consists of a series of rapid syllables on the same note .
25  ranges overlap only in a small area in california .
26   the tufted titmouse , which does not overlap in range , has whiter belly , rusty flanks , and black on the forehead .
