0 the tufted titmouse (baeolophus bicolor) is a small songbird from north america , a species in the tit and chickadee family (paridae) .
1  the black-crested titmouse , found from central and southern texas southwards , was included as a subspecies but is now considered a separate species b .
2  atricristatus .
3 these birds have grey upperparts and white underparts with a white face , a grey crest , a dark forehead and a short stout bill; they have rufous-coloured flanks .
4  the song is usually described as a whistled peter-peter-peter .
5  they make a variety of different sounds , most having a similar tone quality .
6 the habitat is deciduous and mixed woods as well as gardens , parks and shrubland in the eastern united states; they barely range into southeastern canada in the great lakes region .
7  they are all-year residents in the area effectively circumscribed by the great plains , the great lakes , the gulf of mexico and the atlantic ocean .
8  the range is expanding northwards , possibly due to increased availability of winter food at bird feeders .
9  the birds are nowadays resident all year even in rural ohio where there are few bird feeders , while it was noted around 1905 that many birds from these areas migrated south in winter .
10 they forage actively on branches , sometimes on the ground , mainly eating insects , especially caterpillars , but also seeds , nuts and berries .
11  they will store food for later use .
12  they tend to be curious about their human neighbors and can sometimes be spotted on window ledges peering into the windows to watch what's going on inside .
13  they are more shy when seen at bird feeders; their normal pattern there is to scout the feeder from the cover of trees or bushes , fly to the feeder , take a seed , and fly back to cover to eat it .
14 tufted titmice nest in a hole in a tree , either a natural cavity , a man-made nest box , or sometimes an old woodpecker nest .
15  they line the nest with soft materials , sometimes plucking hair from a live animal such as a dog .
16  if they find shed snake skin , they will try to incorporate pieces of it in their nest .
17  their eggs are under an inch long and are white or cream-colored with brownish or purplish spots .
18  sometimes , a bird born the year before remains to help its parents raise the next year's young .
19  the pair may remain together and defend their territory year-round .
20  these birds are permanent residents and often join small mixed flocks in winter .
21  in rare cases , many birds may flock together to rest in a log or tree; some may even suffocate because so many birds are crowded inside of one cavity .
