0 the canyon wren (catherpes mexicanus) is a small north american songbird of the wren family troglodytidae .
1  it is resident throughout its range and is generally found in arid , rocky cliffs , outcrops and canyons .
2  it is a small bird that is hard to see on its rocky habitat; however , it can be heard throughout the canyons by its distinctive loud and beautiful song .
3  it is currently in a monotypic taxon and is the only species in the genus catherpes .
4 ==taxonomy==the taxonomy of the species has been altered and debated for many years with between three and eleven subspecies being proposed at various times .
5  generally , three subspecies are recognized .
6  originally in the genus thryothorus , it was moved into the genus salpinctes along with the rock wren (salpinctes obsoletus), where some researchers still place it; however , generally now the species is in the only species in the genus catherpes .
7 the three generally recognized subspecies are:these subspecies are distinguished by the bill of c .
8  m .
9  albifrons which is generally longer than that of c .
10  m .
11  mexicanus , and its plumage paler , with upperparts more grayish brown , with narrower black bars on tail .
12  in c .
13  m .
14  conspersus the plumage is paler and it is smaller than c .
15  m .
16  mexicanus .
17 ==distribution==resident , although individuals may make short seasonal movements .
18  it ranges from southern british columbia in the okanagan valley and western and southern idaho and southern montana south through central wyoming , colorado throughout much of mexico south to western chiapas .
19  it occurs east to southwest oklahoma and in the edwards plateau of west-central texas .
20  disjunct populations occur in the black hills of southwest south dakota , northeast wyoming and southeast montana .
21  during the winter season the distribution is generally the same , however; concentrations may occur in the chihuahuan desert of southeast texas .
22 ==habitat==similar to the rock wren in habitat , the canyon wren prefers steeper rocky environments , particularly in arid landscapes and deep canyons and terrain (sometimes including buildings , woodpiles , and rock fences) .
23 ==diet/ feeding==the canyon wren feeds on small insects and spiders .
24  since they live on large rocks , they use their long beaks to scope out small crevices .
25  they also get their source of liquid from the insects they consume .
26 ==ecology==it feeds on insects and spiders by probing into crevices with its long bill .
27  its coloration is rustier than that of the rock wren , with a contrasting white throat and breast .
28  the canyon wren is more often heard than seen , and its falling series of whistles is one of the more familiar bird calls of the canyons of the western united states .
29 it builds a cup nest out of twigs and other vegetation in a rock crevice .
30  it lays 4 to 6 eggs , white with reddish brown and gray speckles .
