0 the bewick's wren (thryomanes bewickii) is a wren native to north america .
1  at about {convert|14|cm|in|abbr = on} long , it is grey-brown above , white below , with a long white eyebrow .
2  while similar in appearance to the carolina wren , it has a long tail that is tipped in white .
3  the song is loud and melodious , much like the song of other wrens .
4  the song is broken into two or three individual parts; one individual male may exhibit up to twenty-two different variations on the song pattern , and may even throw in a little ventriloquism to vary it even further .
5  it lives in thickets , brush piles and hedgerows , open woodlands and scrubby areas , often near streams .
6  it eats insects and spiders , which it gleans from vegetation or finds on the ground .
7  wrens are sometimes observed foraging with chickadees and other birds .
8 its range is from southern british columbia , nebraska , southern ontario , and southwestern pennsylvania , maryland , south to mexico , arkansas and the northern gulf states .
9  the bewick's wren does not migrate .
10 the nest is cup-shaped and located in a nook or cavity of some kind .
11  it lays 57 eggs that are white with brown spots .
12  the bewick's wren produces two broods in a season .
13  pairs are more or less monogamous when it comes to breeding , but go solitary throughout the winter .
14 this is currently the only species of its genus , thryomanes .
15  the socorro wren , formerly placed here too , is actually a close relative of the house wren complex , as indicated by biogeography and mtdna nadh dehydrogenase subunit 2 sequence analysis , whereas thryomanes seems not too distant from the carolina wren .
16 ==subspecies==a list of commonly recognized subspecies follows .
17  two have gone extinct during the 20th century , mainly due to habitat destruction and cat predation .
18 the last three are sometimes united as t .
19  b .
20  mexicanus .
21  the validity of subspecies needs to be verified using freshly caught birds and/or molecular data , as specimens are prone to foxing quickly .
