0 the black-tailed gnatcatcher (polioptila melanura) is a small , insectivorous bird which ranges throughout the sonoran and chihuahuan deserts of the southwestern united states and northern mexico .
1   it is nonmigratory and found in arid desert areas year-round .
2 ==taxonomy==the black-tailed gnatcatcher was described by american ornithologist george newbold lawrence in 1857. meaning 'black-tailed', its specific name is derived from the ancient greek melano- 'black' and oura 'tail' .
3 ==description==the black-tailed gnatcatcher reaches about 4.5 to 5 inches in length , much of it taken up by a long black tail lined with white outer feathers .
4   the body is blue-gray , with white underparts , and while it is similar to the blue-gray gnatcatcher , the two birds are differentiated by the amount of black in the tail feathers .
5   the male has a black cap during the summer that extends to the eyes .
6  females and winter males , lacking the black cap , are difficult to distinguish from the blue-gray gnatcatcher .
7  the best way to tell the two apart is the tail; that of the blue-gray is mostly white when viewed from below , and the black-tailed is predominantly black underneath .
8   like other gnatcatchers , it may give harsh , scolding calls while foraging for small insects and spiders in desert shrubs .
9 ==behaviour==black-tailed gnatcatchers live in pairs all year , defending their territory and foraging in trees and low shrubs for a wide variety of small insects and some spiders .
10  unlike the blue-gray gnatcatcher , the black-tailed variety rarely catches insects in midair .
11 ===breeding===the nest is an open-cup , built by both sexes , and is typically found in low shrubs less than five feet off the ground .
12  if available at the nesting site , desert mistletoe , phoradendron californicum , is often used as the substrate for the nest , which provides nice concealment .
13   it is constructed of a variety of materials including weeds , grass , strips of bark , spider webs and plant fibers .
14  it is lined with finer , softer matter .
15  three to five bluish-white eggs with red-brown dots are incubated by both parents and take 14 days to hatch .
16  the young are fed by both parents , and leave the nest 10 to 15 days after hatching .
17  even though cowbirds often lay eggs in this species' nests , and the pair end up raising cowbird young , the black-tailed gnatcatcher population seems to be holding up well .
