0 the horned grebe (podiceps auritus) is a member of the grebe family of water birds .
1  the scientific name comes from latin .
2  podiceps is from podicis , "vent" and pes , "foot", and is a reference to the placement of a grebe's legs towards the rear of its body .
3  the species name , auritus means "eared", from auris , "ear" .
4 [2] it is also known as the slavonian grebe .
5  it is an excellent swimmer and diver , and pursues its fish prey underwater .
6  p .
7  auritus is one of the species to which the agreement on the conservation of african-eurasian migratory waterbirds (aewa) applies .
8 descriptionthe horned grebe is a small grebe at 3138 cm (1215 in) long with a 4655 cm (1822 in) wingspan .
9  unmistakable in summer , the plumage of both male and female includes a black head with brown puffy earlike tufts along the sides of its face .
10  it shows a deep red neck , scarlet eyes , and a small , straight black bill tipped with white .
11  it rides high in the water .
12 subspeciesp .
13  a .
14  auritas , (linnaeus , 1758), eurasiap .
15  a .
16  cornutus , (gmelin , 1789), canada , northern usbreedinghorned grebes breed in vegetated areas of freshwater lakes across europe and asia .
17  it also breeds in remote inland parts of the united states and much of canada .
18  most birds migrate in winter to the coast .
19  during this time , this small grebe is mainly white with a sharply defined black cap .
20  during breeding , the male's call is heard as an odd , striking series of loud croaks and chattering notes followed by prolonged shrieks .
21 like all grebes , it builds a nest on the water's edge , since its legs are set very far back and it cannot walk well .
22  usually two eggs are laid , and the striped young are sometimes carried on the adult's back .
23 in culturenonbreeding plumagefolk names of this bird include devil-diver , hell-diver , pink-eyed diver , and water witch .
24  its name is often abbreviated by british birders to "slav grebe" or simply "slav" .
25 in the lore of the blackfeet , the trickster old man tricked several ducks into closing their eyes and dancing while he killed them one by one .
26  however , the smallest duck looked , saw old man , and alerted the other ducks .
27  this "duck" was the horned grebe , who became the first to notice trouble .
