0 the ruby-crowned kinglet (regulus calendula) is a very small passerine bird found throughout north america .
1  it is a member of the kinglet family .
2  the bird has olive-green plumage with two white wing bars and a white eye-ring .
3  males have a red crown patch , which is usually concealed .
4  the sexes are identical (apart from the crown), and juveniles are similar in plumage to adults .
5  it is one of the smallest songbirds in north america .
6  the ruby-crowned kinglet is not closely related to other kinglets , and is put in its own subgenus , corthylio .
7  three subspecies are currently recognized .
8 the kinglet is migratory , and its range extends from northwest canada and alaska south to mexico .
9  its breeding habitat is spruce-fir forests in the northern , mountainous , united states and canada .
10  the ruby-crowned kinglet builds a cup-shaped nest , which may be pensile or placed on a tree branch and is often hidden .
11  it lays up to 12 eggs , and has the largest clutch of any north american passerine for its size .
12  it is mainly insectivorous , but also eats fruits and seeds .
13 == description ==the ruby-crowned kinglet is a very small bird , being {convert|9|to|11|cm|in|1|sp=us|abbr=on} long , having a wingspan of {convert|16|to|18|cm|in|1|sp=us|abbr=on}, and weighing {convert|5|to|10|g|oz|1|sp=us|abbr=on} .
14  it has gray-green upperparts and olive-buff underparts .
15  it has two white wingbars and a broken white eye ring .
16  the wingbar on the greater secondary coverts (closer to the wing-tip) is wider , and is next to a dark band .
17  the kinglet has a relatively plain face and head , although the male has a scarlet-red crown patch , which is usually concealed by the surrounding feathers .
18  the crown patch is rarely orange , yellow , or not present .
19  females are identical to males (except for the crown) .
20  immature birds are similar to adult females , since young males lack a crown patch .
21  the kinglet usually moves along branches or through foliage with short hops , and flies with bursts of rapid wing beats .
22  it is constantly active , and is easily recognized by its characteristic wing-flicking .
23  its flight has been described as "swift , jerky , and erratic" .
24 compared to the related golden-crowned kinglet , the ruby-crowned kinglet is slightly larger , more elongated , and has greener plumage .
25  the bird can be mistaken for the hutton's vireo , which also displays wing-flicking , though less frequently than the kinglet .
26  it can also be mistaken for the dwarf vireo in mexico .
27  however , both of the vireos are larger , have stouter bills and legs , and lack the kinglet's black bar on the wings .
28 ===vocalization===the ruby-crowned kinglet's vocalizations are remarkably loud and complex for its size .
29  its song can be divided into three main parts: a series of high pitched notes (zee-zee-zee or tee-tee-tee), two to five low trills (turr or tu), and a repeated three note "galloping" phrase (tee-da-leet , tee-da-leet) .
30  however , there is variation in the songs of a given individual , and they often contain only one or two of the three parts .
31  the third part is only sung by male birds; an abbreviated version is heard from the females .
32  other vocalizations of the ruby-crowned kinglet include alarm calls , simple contact calls , and begging calls produced by chicks .
33 ==taxonomy==the kinglets are a small group of birds sometimes included in the old world warblers , but frequently given family status , especially as recent research showed that , despite superficial similarities , the crests are taxonomically remote from the warblers .
34  the names of the family , regulidae , and its only genus , regulus , are derived from the latin regulus , a diminutive of rex , "a king", and refer to the characteristic orange or yellow crests of adult kinglets .
35  the ruby-crowned kinglet was first described in 1766, in the 12th edition of carl linnaeus's systema naturae .
36  its species name means "by the month", and is shared with a genus of flower .
37 as a result of its larger size , strongly red (rather than orange or yellow) crest and lack of black crown stripes , as well as its distinctive vocalisations , the ruby-crowned kinglet is sometimes considered different enough from the old world kinglets and the other american species , the golden-crowned kinglet , to be sometimes assigned to a separate genus , corthylio .
38 up to five subspecies have been recognized , but "cineraceus", breeding in montane western north america , and "arizonensis", breeding in arizona , are considered to be clinal variants of the nominate subspecies .
39  the form grinnellii , breeding from southeast alaska to british columbia differs significantly from nominate calendula , and so is considered to be represent a valid subspecies: it is smaller and shorter-winged , its upperparts are darker and greener , its underparts are buffy rather than grayish olive , and the vent is tinged yellow rather than dull whitish olive .
40  the subspecies obscurus , from guadalupe island , off baja california , is considered endangered , and may already be extinct .
41 hybridization with golden-crowned kinglet has been reported to have possibly occurred .
42 == distribution and habitat ==their breeding habitat is coniferous forests across canada , alaska , northern new england and the western united states .
43  they nest in a well-concealed hanging cup suspended from a conifer branch and may lay as many as twelve eggs in a clutch .
44 the recent counting indicates that the ruby-crowned kinglet population is on the rise .
45  this is mainly due to discovery of less disturbed territory farther north .
46  this allows more successful breeding .
47 these birds migrate to the southern united states and mexico .
48  some birds are permanent residents in the west .
49 == behaviour ==ruby-crowned kinglets forage actively in trees or shrubs , mainly eating small insects and spiders , some berries and tree sap .
50  they may hover over a branch while feeding and sometimes fly out to catch insects in flight .
51  the red crest is raised when agitated or in display .
52  often , they perform a "broken-wing" act to draw predators away from their nest , which they will defend fearlessly , mobbing the intruder which may be a cat , squirrel , or human .
