0 the curve-billed thrasher (toxostoma curvirostre) is a medium-sized mimid that is a member of the genus toxostoma , native to the southwestern united states and much of mexico .
1  referred to as the default desert bird , it is a non-migratory species .
2  several subspecies have been classified since 1827, though there is no consensus on the number .
3  allopatric speciation is believed to have played a major role in the variations of the curve-billed .
4  it shares striking similarities in appearance with another toxostoma member , bendire's thrasher .
5  nevertheless , it is recognized for its grey color and sickle-shaped bill .
6  it generally resides in desert regions of the united states and mexico , but can inhabit areas predominately populated by humans .
7 the demeanor of the curve-billed has been described as "shy and rather wild", but it allows humans to view it closely .
8  it is very aggressive in driving out potential threats , whether competitors for food or predators of its chicks .
9  the curve-billed thrasher sometimes mimicks several other species , though not to the extent of other mimids .
10  it has a variety of distinctive songs , and this extensive repertoire of melodies has led it to be known as cuitiacoache (songbird) in mexico .
11 ==taxonomy==the species was first named toxostoma curvirostre by william john swainson in 1827. since then , six subspecies have been recognized , and have been divided into two branches .
12  genetic research has indicated that the curve-billed thrasher is the sister species of a clade consisting of the ocellated thrasher , brown thrasher , long-billed thrasher , and cozumel thrasher .
13  this contrasts with an earlier suggestion that curve-billed and ocellated thrashers are closest relatives .
14 ===subspecies===eastern: t .
15  c .
16  oberholseri (law , 1928) brownsville thrasher .
17  generally ranges from se texas to ne mexico (e coahuila , nuevo len and tamaulipas)t .
18  c curvirostre (swainson , 1827) ranges from central to south-central mexico (towards pueblo , oaxaca , and veracruz) .
19 t .
20 c .
21  celsum (r .
22  t .
23  moore , 1941) plateau thrasher .
24  range spans from se colorado , sw kansas , extreme nw oklahoma to s/se arizona , s new mexico and w texas to northern mexico (e chihuahua to guanajuato and jalisco)western: t .
25  c .
26  insularum (van rossem , 1930) san esteban thrasher .
27  located in the islands of san esteban and tiburn off the coast of sonora in the gulf of california .
28 t .
29  c .
30  maculatum (nelson , 1900) spotted thrasher .
31  found in nw mexico (s sonora , n sinaloa , sw chihuahua)t .
32  c .
33  occidentale (ridgway , 1882) mazatlan thrasher .
34  located in western mexico (from sinaloa and nayarit to jalisco) .
35 t .
36  c .
37  palmeri (coues , 1872) palmer's thrasher .
38  range is s arizona , n sorona and chihuahua .
39  this species is the representative of the western species , and was suggested to have enough variations to be considered a different species from t .
40 c .
41  curvirostre .
42  t .
43 c .
44  palmeri was also used in a 2009 proposal by the american ornithologists' union to be elevated to species status , along with the eastern t .
45 c .
46  curvisrostre representing the eastern curve-billed thrashers .
47 ==description==the curve-billed thrasher generally measures 25 to 28 cm (10 to 12 inches) long , and is immediately recognized as a thrasher by its long tail and short wings .
48  it is also recognized for its sickle-shaped bill , almost as long as its head width and brownish-black in color .
49  the body is compact with a large head , short wings and long tail .
50  however , the tail is short relative to other thrasher species .
51  the chest is grayish-brown with circular brown-gray spots .
52  the eyes are generally orange , shading to golden in adulthood .
53  juveniles are lacking in pale tips , retrices , abdominal feathers are unkempt and upper parts and chest are washed rufously .
54 variations are markedly different with each subspecies .
55  the eastern subspecies has more distinct spots on its chest , more white along the tips and retraces and obvious wing bars .
56  t .
57 c .
58  palmeri has less spotting on chest and tips and less obvious wing bars .
59  other examples include t .
60 c .
61  curvirostre possessing longer wings and a tail than t .
62 c .
63  oberholseri; t .
64 c .
65  insularum is paler with more grey than t .
66 c .
67  palmeri and has more visible spotting on its breast .
68 one study published in 2003 suggested that curve-billed speciation was due to climate , which could be explained by molt and feather wear .
69  the same study suggested that the sierra madre occidental acts as a barrier to initiate differentiation within the species .
70 ===similar species===because its coloration is similar to bendire's thrasher , the two birds are easily mistaken for one another .
71  the bill of the curve-billed is all black , while that of bendire's is paler down to the lower mandible , showing a dark grey with a basal area that does not feature a stark contrast .
72  the upper and lower mandibles of the curve-billed are curved , while the upper is curved and lower is essentially straight for the bendires' .
73  although geographic variances for the curve-billed can make discerning breast patterns difficult , the curve-billed has a tendency to display larger and rounder spots overall on its breast , in contrast to the bendires' smaller , more pronounced markings shaped like arrowheads .
74  however , curve-billed thrashers can also present this feature .
75  bendires' typically have yellow eyes while curve-billed eyes are typically orange , but bendires' can have variations that appear yellow-orange while some curve-billed eyes are red-orange , yellow-orange , or yellow .
76  the curve-billed is heavier and is more likely to inhabit suburban regions; bendires' are likely to avoid dense vegetation such as mesquite and prefers open grassland with scattered yucca or around hedgegrows in agricultural areas .
77  the song call of bendire's is said to be more melodic and continuous with a chuck , while the curve-billed is known for its whit-wheet calls .
78 some of the aforementioned differences , such as streaks on the breast , bill shape and eye color are even more prominent in juveniles of the two species .
79 ==habitat and range==the curve-billed thrasher is commonly found throughout the southwestern united states from arizona's sonoran desert across new mexico to west texas , southeastern colorado and southwestern kansas as well as most of mexico from the sonoran-chihuahuan deserts and south through the mexican plateau into central tamaulipas , inland to oaxaca , and on the coast of sonora to nayarit .
80  vagrants have been found in bordering states of its range , as far north as north dakota , alberta and manitoba and as far east as florida .
81  palmeri types have been spotted in florida , while curvirostre have been found in iowa on several occasions .
82  other than previously noted exceptions , the curve-billed is essentially non-vagrant .
83 in comparison with other desert thrashers , the curve-billed is not as particular with habitats and can be found from ground level up to {convert|3,000|m|ft|abbr=on} .
84  it generally resides where cholla and saguaro cacti , ocotillo , mesquites , palo verde , and creosote bushes are prevalent .
85  it can also be located along woodland edges , pion , dry desert bushland and areas within its region where cacti are present .
86   if there is an adequate amount of desert vegetation near human habitation , along with feeders , the curve-billed can adapt within these environments .
87 ==behavior==the curve-billed thrasher can generally be found running rapidly from cover to cover or flying near ground level from bush to bush .
88  however , this bird is not shy about being in the open .
89  it is generally a forager on ground level but can be very aggressive in routing out potential competitors for food at feeders , such as the inca dove and round-tailed ground squirrel .
90  it will usually destroy any nest of cactus wrens .
91 ===voice and song===the most distinctive voice of the curve-billed is an abrupt and brash whit-wheet , which sounds akin to a person whistling to get one's attention .
92  it is usually uttered from high perches .
93  the songs are similar to that of the northern mockingbird but notes do not end as abruptly; its voice is regarded as more pleasant .
94  the curve-billed can utter songs consecutively two or three times , the length spanning from 2 to 15 seconds .
95  some phrases are nasal and buzzy; its large vocabulary enables it to conjure successive songs that are usually different from one another .
96 as a mimid it is capable of mimicking several species , including scissor-tailed flycatcher , northern cardinal , pyrrhuloxia and , in one instance , a black-headed grosbeak .
97 ===mating===one recorded case of courtship behavior involving curve-billed thrashers describes two males attacking each other vigorously and resorting to purring and hissings sounds when neither bird appeared to relent .
98  the two males then puffed up their chests and strutted up and down in front of the female .
99  they continued to alternate between purr and hiss and fighting one another until one triumphed .
100  the victor flew towards the female and both chirped melodically before copulation .
101 ==breeding==the curve-billed breeding season begins in february and reaches an apex between march and may; however , new fledglings have been recorded as late as august .
102  dates vary within its range due to temperature and rainfall .
103  nests are generally built at conspicuous locations , the cholla being favored .
104  other potential nesting sites range from mesquite , prickly pear or yucca to the occasional oak and pine trees .
105  the nest is generally a deep cup but can be flat with a depression for the eggs .
106  the outer layer consists of thorny twigs while the inner layer includes smooth sticks , roots , coarse and fine grasses , rootlets or hair .
107 both sexes build the nest; the building periods can be as brief as three days to as long as four weeks .
108  egg count differs by location; the number has been as low as two and as high as five .
109  egg color varies; they can appear bluish-green to pale yellowish-blue , spotted abundantly in reddish-brown .
110  both sexes incubate but the female is mainly responsible as well as being the sole provider of brooding .
111  curve-billed parents defend their nests fervently against other species; snakes are the most frequent predators of eggs and nestlings .
112  curved-billed thrashers are rarely victims of nest parasitism by cowbirds .
113  in situations where food is scarce , parents feed older fledglings first .
114  the fledging period ranges from 11 to 18 days .
115 ==diet==the curve-billed thrasher is an omnivore .
116  its diet includes invertebrates such as beetles , moths , butterflies , arachnids , and snails .
117  it also eats vegetable matter , and fruits from cacti , prickly pear , hackberries , and anacua , among other plants .
118  the curve-billed has also been spotted eating dog food , and will feed it to their chicks .
