0 the california thrasher (toxostoma redivivum) is a large thrasher found primarily in chaparral habitat in california and baja california .
1  similar to the crissal and le conte's thrashers in habit , the california thrasher is the only species of toxostoma throughout most of its limited range .
2  like most thrashers , it rarely flies in the open , preferring to keep hidden in dense brush .
3  therefore , while it is common throughout much of its range , it is rarely seen .
4 at about 12 in (30 cm) and nearly 85 g (3.0 oz), the california thrasher is the largest species of mimid .
5  it is generally brown , with buffy underparts and undertail (unlike the crissal) .
6  it has a dark cheek pattern and eye-line , and unlike most thrashers , has dark eyes .
7  the california thrasher eats insects and small invertebrates .
8 a long-tailed bird of the chaparral , the california thrasher is found only in california and baja california .
9 adult descriptionlarge , long-tailed songbird .
10 grayish brown all over .
11 long , down-curved bill .
12 reddish brown underside .
13 immature descriptionsimilar to adult , but generally duller , with less distinct features and fewer contrasts than in adult .
14 conservation statushas disappeared in many coastal areas with increasing urbanization , but still fairly widespread and common .
15 familymockingbirds and thrashershabitatchaparral , foothills , valley thickets , parks , gardens .
16  within its range , found in practically any lowland habitat with dense low brush .
17  most common in chaparral , also occurs in streamside thickets and in suburban neighborhoods that have enough vegetation .
18  extends into edges of desert regions , and in chaparral in mountains up to about 6,000' .
19 several kinds of dull gray-brown thrashers occur in the west , but this is the only one along the california coast .
20  the bird's normal range is limited to california and a corner of baja , but within that range it is quite common in the chaparral , even coming into brushy suburbs .
21  it spends most of its time on the ground , walking and running with its tail often held high , stopping to dig in the dirt with its sickle-shaped bill .
22 photo galleryfeeding behaviorforages mostly on the ground , using its heavy curved bill to flip leaf-litter aside and to dig in the soil.3-4, sometimes 2. pale blue , evenly spotted with pale brown .
23  incubation is by both parents , about 14 days .
24  young: both parents feed nestlings .
25  young leave the nest after about 12-14 days , are unable to fly well for several more days .
26  male may care for young from 1st brood while female begins laying 2nd clutch .
27  2 broods per year , perhaps sometimes 3.youngboth parents feed nestlings .
28  young leave the nest after about 12-14 days , are unable to fly well for several more days .
29  male may care for young from 1st brood while female begins laying 2nd clutch .
30  2 broods per year , perhaps sometimes 3.mostly insects and berries .
31  feeds on a wide variety of insects , including ants , wasps , bees , beetles , caterpillars , moths , and many others .
32  also eats some spiders and centipedes .
33  berries and small fruits are important in diet , and eats seeds , acorns , and other plant material .
34  will come to bird feeders for miscellaneous scraps .
35 nestingpairs may remain together on territory all year .
36  male sings to defend nesting territory , usually from top of shrub or tree; song often includes imitations of other birds .
37  nest: placed in a dense shrub or extensive thickets , less than 10' above the ground , usually 2-4' up .
38  nest (built by both sexes) is a bulky open cup of sticks and twigs , lined with fine grass , weeds , rootlets , strips of bark , and other soft items .
