0 the yellow-throated warbler (setophaga dominica) is a small migratory songbird species breeding in temperate north america .
1  it belongs to the new world warbler family (parulidae) .
2 ==description==in summer , male yellow-throated warblers display grey upperparts and wings , with double white wing bars .
3  their throats are yellow , and the remainder of their underparts are white , and are streaked with black on the flanks .
4  their heads are strongly patterned in black and white , with a long supercilium; the different subspecies may display yellow and white superciliums .
5  remiges and rectrices are black .
6  they measure {convert|14|cm|in|abbr=on} long .
7 other plumages of these birds  females immatures and non-breeding males  resemble washed-out versions of the summer males; in particular they have a less crisply defined strong head pattern .
8  they also have less bright yellows , and dark grey feathers instead of black ones in the body plumage .
9  compared to many other new world warblers , sexual dimorphism is slight however .
10 the males' songs are clear , descending whistles .
11  the calls are high sees or sharp chips .
12 ==ecology==these birds breed in southeastern north america , and their breeding ranges extend from southern pennsylvania and northern missouri , to the gulf of mexico .
13  one subspecies , from northwest florida , is resident all year round .
14  the other populations of this species are migratory , wintering at the gulf coast , eastern central america , and the caribbean .
15  vagrant wintering birds are sometimes seen in northernmost south america .
16 the yellow-throated warbler is a woodland species with a preference for coniferous or swamp tree species , in which it preferably nests .
17  they are insectivorous , but will include a considerable amount of berries and nectar in their diet outside the breeding season .
18  food is typically picked off tree branches directly , but flying insects may be caught in a brief hover .
19 these birds build cup-shaped nests which are built in a trees , and are concealed amongst conifer needles or spanish moss (tillandsia usneoides) .
20  their clutches consist of 35 (usually 4) eggs .
21 the yellow-throated warbler is not considered a threatened species by the iucn .
