0 the spotted towhee (pipilo maculatus) is a large new world sparrow .
1  the taxonomy of the towhees has been debated in recent decades , and formerly this bird and the eastern towhee were considered a single species , the rufous-sided towhee .
2  an archaic name for the spotted towhee is the oregon towhee (pipilo maculatus oregonus) .
3 the form that breeds on socorro island is much smaller than other rufous-sided towhees , and has gray upperparts .
4  it is sometimes split as the socorro towhee (pipilo socorroensis) .
5 ==description==adults have rufous sides , a white belly and a long dark tail with white edges .
6  the eyes are red .
7  they have white spots on their back and white wing bars .
8  males have a dark head , upper body and tail; these parts are brown or gray in the female .
9 the western spotted towhee has white spots on its primary and secondary feathers .
10  the eastern towhee is the same bird in terms of its size and structure but does not have white spots .
11 they have a round , chunky body , fan shaped tail , short , thick beak , and dull pink legs .
12 ==behavior==northwestern birds migrate eastwards to the central plains of the united states , mostly the northwestern-central great plains .
13  in other areas , some birds may move to lower elevations in the winter .
14 their breeding habitat is chaparral , thickets or shrubby areas across western north america .
15  this bird interbreeds with the collared towhee where their ranges overlap in southwestern mexico .
16 they nest either on the ground or low in bushes , seldom more than {convert|1.5|m|ft|abbr=on} above the ground .
17  the female builds the nest over a period of about five days .
18  it is bulky and sturdily made of leaves , strips of bark , twigs , forb stalks , and grasses , lined with pine needles , shredded bark , grass , and sometimes hair .
19 at least two broods , consisting of three to five eggs , are laid per season .
20  the egg shells are grayish or creamy-white , sometimes with a tinge of green , with reddish brown spots that can form a wreath or cap .
21  the female incubates the eggs alone for 12 to 14 days; the young leave the nest at 10 to 12 days .
22  nests are parasitized by cowbirds .
23 these birds forage on the ground or in low vegetation , with a habit of noisily rummaging through dry leaves searching for food .
24  they mainly eat insects , acorns , seeds and berries .
25 the call may be harsher and more varied than for the eastern towhee .
