0 the rufous-crowned sparrow (aimophila ruficeps) is a small american sparrow .
1  this passerine is primarily found across the southwestern united states and much of the interior of mexico , south to the transverse mountain range , and to the pacific coast to the southwest of the transverse range .
2  its distribution is patchy , with populations often being isolated from each other .
3  twelve subspecies are generally recognized , though up to eighteen have been suggested .
4  this bird has a brown back with darker streaks and gray underparts .
5  the crown is rufous , and the face and supercilium are gray with a brown or rufous streak extending from each eye and a thick black malar streak .
6 these sparrows feed primarily on seeds in the winter and insects in the spring and summer .
7  the birds are often territorial , with males guarding their territory through song and displays .
8  flight is awkward for this species , which prefers to hop along the ground for locomotion .
9  they are monogamous and breed during spring .
10  two to five eggs are laid in the bird's nest , which is cup-shaped and well hidden .
11  adult sparrows are preyed upon by house cats and small raptors , while young may be taken by a range of mammals and reptiles .
12  they have been known to live for up to three years , two months .
13  although the species has been classified as least concern , or unthreatened with extinction , some subspecies are threatened by habitat destruction and one may be extinct .
14 ==taxonomy==this bird belongs to the family emberizidae , which consists of the american sparrows and eurasian buntings .
15  the american sparrows are seed-eating new world birds with conical bills , brown or gray plumage , and distinctive head patterns .
16  birds in the genus aimophila tend to be medium-sized at {convert|5|to|8|in|cm|.01} in length , live in arid scrubland , have long bills and tails in proportion to their body size as well as short , rounded wings , and build cup-shaped nests .
17 the rufous-crowned sparrow was described in 1852 by american ornithologist john cassin as ammodramus ruficeps .
18  it has also been described as belonging to the genus peucaea , which contains several sparrows in the genus aimophila that share characteristics , such as a larger bill and a patch of yellow under the bend of the wing , that other members of the genus do not .
19  however , splitting the peucaea sparrows into a separate genus is not generally recognized .
20  a 2008 phylogenetic analysis of the genus aimophila divided it into four genera , with the rufous-crowned sparrow and its two closest relatives , the oaxaca sparrow and rusty sparrow , being maintained as the genus aimophila .
21  in addition , this study suggested that the rufous-crowned sparrow may be more closely related to the brown towhees of the genus pipilo than the other members of the historical genus aimophila .
22 the derivation of the current genus name , aimophila , is from the greek aimos/, meaning "thicket", and -philos/-, meaning "loving" .
23  the specific epithet is a literal derivation of the common name , derived from the latin rufus , meaning "reddish" or "tawny", and -ceps , from caput , meaning "head" .
24  the bird is also occasionally referred to colloquially as the rock sparrow because of its preference for rocky slopes .
25 ===subspecies===twelve subspecies are generally recognized , although sometimes up to eighteen are named .
26 the other six subspecies that are occasionally recognized are a .
27  r .
28  extima and a .
29  r .
30  pallidissima , which were described by a .
31  r .
32  phillips in 1966, a .
33  r .
34  phillipsi , which was described by j .
35 p .
36  hubbard and crossin in 1974, and a .
37  r .
38  duponti , a .
39  r .
40  laybournae , and a .
41  r .
42  suttoni , which were described by j .
43 p .
44  hubbard in 1975.==description==the rufous-crowned sparrow is a smallish sparrow at {convert|5.25|in|cm|.01} in length , with males tending to be larger than females .
45  it ranges from {convert|15|to|23|g|oz|abbr=on} in weight and averages about {convert|19|g|oz|abbr=on} .
46  it has a brown back with darker streaks and gray underparts .
47  its wings are short , rounded , and brown and lack wingbars , or a line of feathers of a contrasting color in the middle of the bird's wing .
48  the sparrow's tail is long , brown , and rounded .
49  the face and supercilium (the area above the eye) are gray with a brown or rufous streak extending from each eye and a thick black streak on each cheek .
50  the crown ranges from rufous to chestnut , a feature which gives it its common name , and some subspecies have a gray streak running through the center of the crown .
51  the bill is yellow and cone-shaped .
52  the sparrow's throat is white with a dark stripe .
53  its legs and feet are pink-gray .
54  both sexes are similar in appearance , but the juvenile rufous-crowned sparrow has a brown crown and numerous streaks on its breast and flanks during the spring and autumn .
55 the song is a short , fast , bubbling series of chip notes that can accelerate near the end , and the calls include a nasal chur and a thin tsi .
56  when threatened or separated from its mate , the sparrow makes a dear-dear-dear call .
57 ==distribution and habitat==this bird is found in the southwestern united states and mexico from sea level up to {convert|9800|ft|m|.01}, though it tends to be found between {convert|3000|and|6000|ft|m|.01} .
58  it lives in california , southern arizona , southern new mexico , texas , and central oklahoma south along baja california and in western mexico to southern puebla and oaxaca .
59  in the midwestern united states , the sparrow is found as far east as a small part of western arkansas , and also in a small region of northeastern kansas , its most northeastern habitat .
60  the range of this species is discontinuous and is made up of many small , isolated populations .
61  the rufous-crowned sparrow is a non-migratory species , though the mountain subspecies are known to descend to lower elevations during severe winters .
62  male sparrows maintain and defend their territories throughout the year .
63 this sparrow is found in open oak woodlands and dry uplands with grassy vegetation and bushes .
64  it is often found near rocky outcroppings .
65  the species is also known from coastal scrublands and chaparral areas .
66  the rufous-crowned sparrow thrives in open areas cleared by burning .
67 ==ecology and behavior==the average territory size of rufous-crowned sparrows in the chaparral of california ranges from {convert|2|acre|ha|.01} to {convert|4|acre|ha|.01} .
68  the density of territories varies by habitat , including 2.5 to 5.8 territories per {convert|99|acre|ha|.01} of three- to five-year-old burned chaparral to 3.9 to 6.9 territories for the same amount of coastal scrubland .
69  one pair tends to be supported by a territory , although birds without a mate have been seen sharing a territory with a mated pair .
70 this sparrow is awkward in flight and primarily uses running and hopping to move .
71  the rufous-crowned sparrow will at times forage in pairs during the breeding season , and in family-sized flocks in late summer and early autumn .
72  during the winter they can occasionally be found in loose mixed-species foraging flocks .
73 predators of adult sparrows include house cats and small raptors like cooper's and sharp-shinned hawks , american kestrels , and white-tailed kites .
74  the nests may be raided by a range of species including mammals and reptiles such as snakes , though nest predation has not yet been directly observed , and nesting sparrows have been observed using three kinds of displays to distract potential predators; the rodent run , the broken wing , and the tumbling off the bush .
75  birds adopt a rodent run display to distract predators .
76  the head , neck and tail are lowered , wings held out , and feathers fluffed as the bird runs rapidly and voices a continuous alarm call .
77  in the broken wing display , the sparrow imitates having a broken wing by dropping one to the ground and hopping away from the nest with one wing dragging , leading the predator away until the bird ceases the act and escapes the predator .
78  the adult rufous-crowned sparrow distracts a nest predator by falling from the top of a bush to attract the predator to itself in the tumbling off the bush display .
79 the longest lifespan recorded for a rufous-crowned sparrow is three years , two months .
80  two species of tick , amblyomma americanum and ixodes pacificus , are known to parasitize the sparrow .
81 ===diet===this sparrow feeds primarily on small grass and forb seeds , fresh grass stems , and tender plant shoots during autumn and winter .
82  during these seasons , insects such as ants , grasshoppers , ground beetles , and scale insects as well as spiders make up a small part of its diet .
83  in the spring and summer , the bird's diet includes a greater quantity and variety of insects .
84 the rufous-crowned sparrow forages slowly on or near the ground by walking or hopping under shrubs or dense grasses .
85  though it occasionally forages in weedy areas , it is almost never observed foraging in the open .
86  it has occasionally been observed feeding in branches and low shrubs .
87  during the breeding season , it gleans its food from grasses and low shrubs .
88  however , normally the species obtains its food by either pecking or less frequently scratching at leaf litter .
89  this bird tends to forage in a small family group and in a limited area .
90 it is unknown whether this species obtains all of the water it needs from its food or if it must also drink; however , it has been observed both drinking and bathing in pools of water after rain storms .
91 ===reproduction===the rufous-crowned sparrow breeds in sparsely vegetated scrubland .
92  males attract a mate by singing from regular positions at the edge of their territories throughout the breeding season .
93  these birds are monogamous , taking only one mate at a time , and pairs often remain together for several years .
94  if singing males come within contact of each other , they may initially raise their crowns and face the ground to display this feature; if that fails to make the other bird leave , they stiffen their body , droop their wings , raise their tails , and stick their head straight out .
95  males guard their territories year-round .
96 while it is not known when precisely the breeding season starts , the earliest that a sparrow has been observed carrying nesting material was on march 2 in southern california .
97  the female bird builds a bulky , thick-walled open-cup nest typically on the ground , though occasionally in a low bush up to {convert|18|in|cm|abbr=on} above it , from dried grasses and rootlets , sometimes with strips of bark , small twigs , and weed stems .
98  nests are well hidden , as they are built near bushes or tall grasses or overhanging rock with concealing vegetation .
99  once a sparrow chooses a nesting site , it tends to return to the site for many years .
100  it lays between two and five eggs at a time and typically only raises one brood a year , though some birds in california have been observed raising two or even three broods a year .
101  in case of a nesting failure , replacement clutches may be laid .
102  the eggs are an unmarked , pale bluish-white .
103  broods of the rufous-crowned sparrow have very occasionally been observed to be parasitized by the brown-headed cowbird .
104 incubation of the eggs lasts 11 to 13 days and is performed solely by the female .
105  the hatchlings are naked and quills do not begin to show until the third day .
106  only females brood the nestlings , though both parents may bring whole insects to their young .
107  when a young rufous-crowned sparrow leaves the nest after eight or nine days , it is still incapable of flight , though it can run through the underbrush; during this time it is still fed by the parents .
108  juveniles tend to leave their parent's territory and move into adjacent habitat in autumn or early winter .
109  reproductive success varies strongly with annual rainfall and is highest in wet el nio years , since cool rainy weather reduces the activity of snakes , the main predator of the sparrow's nests .
110 ==conservation==the rufous-crowned sparrow is treated as a species of least concern , or not threatened with extinction , by birdlife international due to its large geographical range of about {convert|463323|mi2|km2|abbr=on}, estimated population of 2.4 million individuals , and lack of a 30% population decline over the last ten years .
111  in years without sufficient rains , many birds fail to breed and those that do produce fewer offspring .
112  some of the local populations of this bird are threatened and declining in number .
113  the island subspecies and populations have declined in some cases: a .
114  r .
115  sanctorum of the todos santos islands is believed to be extinct , and the populations on santa catalina island and baja california's islas de san martin have not been observed since the early 1900s .
116  populations of the species in southern california are also becoming more restricted in range because of urbanization and agricultural development in the region .
117  additionally , the sparrow is known to have been poisoned by the rodenticide warfarin , though more research is needed to determine the effects of pesticides on the rufous-crowned sparrow .
