0 the pyrrhuloxia or desert cardinal (cardinalis sinuatus) is a medium-sized north american song bird found in the american southwest and northern mexico .
1  this distinctive species with a short , stout bill , red crest and wings , closely resembles the northern and the vermilion cardinals which are in the same genus .
2 ==taxonomy==the desert cardinal is one of three birds in the genus cardinalis and is included in the family cardinalidae , a group of passerine birds found in north and south america .
3 its name of pyrrhuloxia - once part of its latin name - comes from greek terms describing its coloration ( = pyrrhos = reddish or orange) and the shape of its bill ( = loxos = oblique) .
4  the common name , desert cardinal , refers to it inhabiting the southwest , and often arid regions , of the north american continent .
5 ==description==the desert cardinal is a medium-sized song bird where the length for both sexes is approximately 8.3 in (21 cm), while the average weight is  0.81.5 oz (2443 g) .
6 the most obvious differences between the male desert cardinal and the northern cardinal are in their coloring .
7  the desert cardinal is predominantly brownish-gray with a red breast , a red mask , and a yellow parrot-like bill that is stout and rounded .
8  the females of the two species resemble each other much more closely , but the shapes of their bills are diagnostic .
9  the songs of the two species are identical , though the pyrrhuloxia's is not quite as loud .
10  this cardinal retains the distinctive long pointed red crest present in all species .
11 ==distribution and habitat==the pyrrhuloxia is a year-round resident of desert scrub and mesquite thickets , in the u.s.
13  states of arizona , new mexico , and texas and woodland edges in mexico .
14  it occupies the southwestern half of texas , approximately the southern third of new mexico , and southeastern region of arizona .
15  its range flows further south inhabiting areas from the west to east coast of mexico north of the sierra madre del sur , trans-mexican volcanic belt and isthmus of tehuantepec , whilst excluding the sierra madre occidental .
16  an individual of the species has reportedly been seen as far away from its dominant range as costa mesa , california in orange county .
17 this cardinal is relatively nonmigratory , though it may occasionally stray slightly north of its usual range .
18  the pyrrhuloxia prefers habitat along stream beds .
19  in areas where the range of the pyrrhuloxia and northern cardinal overlap , hybridization may occur between them .
20  there seem to be no conflicts between the species as none have yet been reported .
21 ==ecology==in breeding season , songs are used to establish and defend territories .
22  one song has a sharp , clear , "wha-cheer , wha-cheer" while another is characteristic of a metallic "quink .
23 "  females also sing , but they use softer and duller notes .
24  a short "cheep" or "chip" is a regular contact call given by both sexes while foraging .
25 ===diet===the pyrrhuloxia's diet consists of seeds , fruits and insects .
26  while foraging , the desert cardinal will snatch insects from trees as well as pick seeds predominantly from the stalks of grasses and similar plants .
27  it also seeks out cactus fruit for consumption .
28  this bird is a benefit to cotton fields as it assists in eating populations of cotton worms and weevils .
29  this species of cardinal also visits bird feeders and in the winter forages in huge flocks , sometimes numbering in the thousands .
30 ===reproduction===the breeding season for this cardinal usually begins in mid-march , ending in mid-august .
31  as the breeding season approaches , territories are established and defended by the male .
32  the male defends the territory by chasing away intruders and from a good vantage point , singing .
33  where both the desert and northern cardinal breeding territories overlap , no inter-species conflicts have been observed .
34 the desert cardinal places its nest in dense shrub , often concealed .
35  the nest is small and forms a bowl or cup-like shape made up of grass , twigs or bits of tree bark .
36  clutches of two to four eggs are most common while the eggs are whitish with specks of green or gray .
37  during an incubation period of two weeks , the male brings food to the female .
38  at hatching the chicks are helpless and have a bright yellow bill with red lining around the mouth .
39  the chicks fledge in approximately ten days while both male and female tend to the young .
40  the young bird can wait for up to a month before fully fledging , becoming independent and feeding in large flocks .
41  during this period the bird will achieve complete growth .
42 ==relationship with humans==as large areas of the pyrrhuloxia's habitat in its northern range have been lost to humans , unlike with the northern cardinal , the former's populations appear to be in a slight decline .
43 ==photo gallery==  image:pyrr .
44 jpg|male in tucson , us image:cardinalis_sinuatus_-tuscon ,_arizona ,_usa_-male-8.jpg|male in tucson image:cardinalis sinuatus .
45 jpg|male  in roma , texas image:pyrr-seedblock .
46 jpg|feeding male pyrrhuloxia_by_langhorne .
