0 the rusty blackbird (euphagus carolinus) is a medium-sized blackbird , closely related to grackles ("rusty grackle" is an older name for the species) .
1  it is a bird that prefers wet forested areas , breeding in the boreal forest and muskeg across northern canada , and migrating southeast to the united states during winter .
2 formerly abundant , the rusty blackbird has undergone one of the most rapid declines of any abundant bird species in north america in recent years , for reasons that are not well understood .
3 ==description==adults have a pointed bill and a pale yellow eye .
4  they have black plumage with faint green and purple gloss; the female is greyer .
5  "rusty" refers to the brownish winter plumage .
6  they resemble the western member of the same genus , the brewer's blackbird; however , brewer's has a longer bill and the male's head is iridescent green .
7 ==habitat==their breeding habitat is wet temperate coniferous forests and muskeg across canada and alaska .
8  birds usually nest at the edge of ponds and wetlands with the cup nest located in a tree or dense shrub , often over the water .
9  emerging dragonflies and their larvae are important food items during the summer .
10 these birds migrate to the eastern and southeastern united states , into parts of the grain belt , sometimes straying into mexico .
11 ==behavior==they forage on wet ground or in shallow water , mainly eating insects , small fish and some seeds .
12  their most common mode of foraging is to vigorously flip leaves and rip at submerged aquatic vegetation .
13  the mast of small-acorn producing oaks , such as willow oak , is also important .
14  in some areas , the nuts of planted pecans are heavily used .
15  they very rarely will attack small passerine birds , and have been known to kill species as large as the common snipe .
16  they feed in flocks during migration and on the wintering grounds , sometimes joining other blackbirds , both often occurring in single species flocks .
17  they more often roost with other blackbirds; some small roosts are in brushy vegetation in old fields and others are in massive mixed flockssometimes in the urban areas .
18 the species nests relatively early for a boreal forest bird .
19  they linger in the boreal zone to complete their molt .
20  their autumn migration is slow , with birds often remaining in the northern states well into december; spring migration is much more rapid .
21  the largest wintering concentrations are found in the lower mississippi valley , with smaller concentrations in the piedmont and south atlantic coastal plain .
22 fairly quiet in fall migration and most of the winter , both males and females will sing (particularly on warm days) in the late winter and spring .
23  the song consists of gurgling and high-pitched squeaks .
24 ==population==rusty blackbirds have declined significantly in recent decades .
25  the reasons are unclear , but habitat loss is likely a major contributor to the decline .
26  the habitat loss is likely due to multiple factors , including development for oil , gas , and mining industries , hydroelectric projects , and the clearing of forests for forestry .
27  mercury contamination may be a problem for populations in northeastern north america .
28  rarer than previously believed , it was uplisted from a species of least concern to vulnerable status on the 2007 iucn red list .
29  deliberate poisoning of mixed-species blackbird flocks , targeting brown-headed cowbird , common grackle and red-winged blackbird , in the southeastern u.s.
31  may also be playing a role; there is currently no estimate of the number of rusty blackbirds killed by these poisonings .
32  in the eastern part of its range , acid rain may be decreasing the availability of calcium-rich invertebrates that the rusty blackbird depends on for food .
33 additionally , citizen science projects such as the north american breeding bird survey and christmas bird count have determined that rusty blackbirds have dropped 85%98% in the past 40 years .
34  this is very worrisome for many people , as scientists are desperately trying to figure out what exactly went wrong .
35  sighting submission services such as ebird are encouraging birders to keep track of rusty blackbirds .
