0 a small pale bird of the high arctic , the hoary redpoll is a rare winter visitor to southern canada and the northern united states .
1  during redpoll invasions , a few paler hoary redpolls can sometimes be spotted within flocks of common redpolls .
2 adult descriptiona very small pale finch .
3 bill small and conical .
4 chin black .
5 forehead red .
6 rump white .
7 undertail white .
8 immature descriptionimmature male resembles adult female .
9 conservation statusstill common and widespread , but like other birds in the high arctic , may be vulnerable to the effects of climate change .
10 familyfincheshabitatthickets , tundra scrub .
11  in winter , also woodland edges , fields .
12  breeds in brushy places of far north , especially in low thickets of willow , alder , or dwarf birch on open tundra , sometimes along forest edge .
13  compared to common redpoll , tends to nest in more open or barren habitat .
14  in winter , also found around woodland edges , brushy or weedy fields .
15 a very close relative of the common redpoll , but adapted to even bleaker conditions , the hoary redpoll is only a scarce visitor south of the arctic .
16  in those winters when large numbers of redpolls invade southward , a few hoarys are usually mixed into the flocks .
17  on the breeding grounds , this species extends farther north , onto high arctic islands of canada .
18  where the two redpolls overlap , the hoary tends to nest on more barren upland tundra , where the patches of shrubs are fewer and smaller .
19 photo galleryfeeding .
20  diet and feeding behavior very similar to those of common redpollnestingdoes not seem to defend nesting territories; several pairs may nest fairly close together , perhaps because good nesting sites tend to be concentrated in small patches surrounded by tundra .
21  in courtship , male feeds female .
22  nest: placed within a few feet of the ground in dense low shrubs , sometimes on the ground .
23  nest (built by female) is a small open cup of grass and plant down , sometimes with fine twigs , rootlets , leaves , lined with ptarmigan feathers and sometimes animal hair .
