0 a predatory songbird , the northern shrike breeds in taiga and tundra and winters in southern canada and the northern united states .
1  it feeds on small birds , mammals , and insects , sometimes impaling them on spines or barbed wire fences .
2 adult descriptionmedium-sized songbird .
3 gray back .
4 whitish throat and chest .
5 black mask .
6 large head .
7 medium-long tail .
8 stout bill with hook at end .
9 wings black with white patch .
10 tail black with white outer feathers .
11 immature descriptionsimilar to adult , but more brownish , with more distinct barring on chest , and less distinct mask .
12 conservation statusno clear evidence of decreasing numbers in north america , but the species should be watched , since various kinds of shrikes around the world are showing declines .
13  an odd historical note: in the 1870s , when the house sparrow from europe had just been introduced here , a warden was hired to shoot northern shrikes on the boston commons in winter to protect the sparrows! although the warden killed as many as 50 shrikes one winter , this episode probably had little effect on the total population of the species .
14 familyshrikeshabitatsemi-open country with lookout posts; trees , scrub .
15  breeds in far north in partly open or scattered spruce woods and in willow and alder scrub along streams or edges of tundra .
16  winters in similar semi-open areas , sometimes in open grassland with a few high perches , but seems to prefer some brushy areas nearby .
17 this tough bird feeds on rodents and smaller birds for much of the year .
18  it spends the summer in the far north , appearing in southern canada and the lower 48 states only in winter .
19  solitary and wary , the shrike is likely to be seen perched at the top of a lone tree in an open field , watching for prey .
20 photo galleryfeeding behaviorforages by watching from an exposed perch , then darting out in swift , powerful flight after prey is spotted .
21  uses its heavy hooked bill to kill its prey , although small birds attacked in flight may be forced to the ground first with the shrike's feet .
22  dead prey is sometimes impaled on a thorn and then eaten later .
23 clutch size varies , often 4-7 eggs , up to 9 in alaska .
24  eggs pale gray or greenish white , spotted with brown , olive , and gray .
25  incubation is probably mostly or entirely by female , about 15-17 days .
26  young: both parents feed nestlings .
27  young leave the nest about 19-20 days after hatching , are tended by parents for several more weeks .
28 youngboth parents feed nestlings .
29  young leave the nest about 19-20 days after hatching , are tended by parents for several more weeks .
30 includes small birds , rodents , large insects .
31  varied diet includes many small songbirds , especially in winter and early spring; also many voles and other small rodents , and many large insects when available .
32  especially in eurasia , also known to eat lizards , frogs , snakes .
33 nestingmale sings to defend nesting territory and perhaps to attract a mate , giving a surprisingly complex song that includes imitations of other birds .
34  nest: placed in a low tree or large shrub , often in spruce or willow , usually 6-15' above the ground .
35  nest (probably built by both sexes) is a loosely made , bulky , open cup of twigs , grass , bark strips , moss , lined with feathers and animal hair .
