0 the blue-headed vireo (vireo solitarius) is a neotropical migrating song bird found in north and central america .
1  there are currently two recognized sub-species that belong to the blue-headed vireo .
2  it has a range that extends across canada and the eastern coast of the united-states , mexico and some of central america .
3  it prefers large temperate forests with a mix of evergreen trees and deciduous under growth .
4 as the name suggests , the blue-headed vireo is characterized by its blue-grey head and bold yellow wing bars .
5  both sexes are very similar in plumage and size .
6  juveniles also have a similar plumage .
7 populations of the blue-headed vireo have been steadily increasing since the 1970s and was therefore been classified as a "least concern" species in 2004.== description ==the blue-headed vireo has similar plumage year round and does not drastically change its appearance during the breeding season .
8  it can be characterized by its olive green upper body , two bold yellow wing bars down the edge of its wing , and a deep blue-grey crown from which it gets its name .
9  the juvenile plumage of immature blue-headed vireos is not distinct but very similar to the adult plumage .
10  while this birds appearance is similar to the closely related cassin's vireo (vireo cassinii), the cassin's vireo can be differentiated by its lighter yellow patches , a smaller , thinner bill , and a brownish-grey crown .
11  there is little to no sexual dimorphism between males and females as both are similar in plumage colouration and size .
12 like most vireos , the blue-headed vireo is a relatively small bird with a length of {convert|126|-|148|mm|in|abbr=on} .
13  the wingspan is usually found to be around {convert|200|-|240|mm|in|abbr=on} and their weight is typically {convert|13|-|19|g|oz|abbr=on} .
14  there are some subtle differences between the v .
15 s .
16  solitarius and v .
17 s .
18  alticola sub-species .
19  v .
20 s .
21  alticola , the larger of the two sub-species , has a darker back with a larger wing length of {convert|76|-|83.5|mm|in|abbr=on} and a bill length of {convert|11|-|12|mm|in|abbr=on} .
22  conversely , v .
23 s .
24  solitarius is slightly smaller with a wing length of {convert|69.2|-|77.8|mm|in|abbr=on}, and a bill length of {convert|8.9|-|11|mm|in|abbr=on} .
25 the average lifespan of the blue-headed vireo in the wild has been measured to be approximately 7 years and 5 months .
26 == taxonomy ==the blue-headed vireo is placed in the genus vireo , a group of small migrating passerine birds that are characterized by their usually dull greenish colouring , and a simple , monotonous song .
27  members of this group are usually characterized by the presence or absence of eye-rings , eye-strips , and wing bars .
28  there is no sexual dimorphism between sexes in this group .
29 though it had been previously classified as a separate species , the blue-headed vireo along with the plumbeous vireo (vireo plumbeus) and the cassins vireo (v .
30  cassinii) were lumped in the 1950s into a single species , based on morphological data .
31  this group of vireos was collectively known as the "solitary vireo" (vireo solitarius) .
32  this taxonomy prevailed until 1997 when new molecular data showed that there were in fact three distinct species .
33  the taxonomy reverted to that prior to the 1950s , and the blue-headed vireo was once again its own species .
34 there are two recognized subspecies of blue-headed vireo:== habitat and distribution ==native to north america , the blue-headed vireo enjoys a large breeding range that extends over an immense area of canada and northern united states .
35  the breeding range of v .
36 s .
37  solitarius extends from northeastern british columbia across alberta , saskatchewan , manitoba , ontario and quebec and down to southern pennsylvania and new jersey .
38  v .
39 s .
40  alticola has a distinct breeding range that includes western maryland and south , mainly in the appalachian mountains , to northern georgia .
41  at the end of the breeding season , the blue-headed vireo migrates south to its overwintering area .
42  v .
43 s .
44  solitarius has the longest migration of the two sub-species and inhabits an overwintering area that includes eastern and southern mexico to northern central america .
45  v .
46 s .
47  alticola migrates across a shorter distance to an area that extends from southeastern virginia to texas .
48 blue-headed vireos prefer to breed in cool temperate forests , which in the southern part of its breeding range are found at higher elevations .
49  evergreen forests with spruce , fir , hemlock , and pine mixed with deciduous growth such as alder shrubs , willow shrubs , poplar , birch or maple trees are the habitat of choice .
50  during the winter , blue-headed vireos inhabit mixed woods of pines and hardwoods .
51  they are also found in coastal and flood plain swamps and low shrubby thickets .
52 year round , even during the breeding season , population density is somewhat low and spread out .
53  overwintering population densities are usually found to be lower than in the breeding season .
54  the density of the population ultimately depends on the type of forest being inhabited .
55 during migration , blue-headed vireos are often found to flock with groups of different sparrow species but rarely with members of its own species .
56 === habitat loss ===when blue-headed vireos arrive on their breeding grounds , typically in mid-april , many deciduous trees have yet to leaf out , leading them to nest in evergreen trees including hemlocks .
57  recently , however , many hemlocks have been killed by an invasive asian insect , the hemlock woolly adelgid (adelges tsugae), leaving the vireos with fewer nesting options until the deciduous trees begin to leaf out .
58 == behaviour ===== vocalizations ===the primary song of the blue-headed vireo is a simple , slow , monotonous tune that is often confused with the faster red-eyed vireo (vireo olivaceus) song .
59  the primary song is sung only by the males and usually only during the breeding season .
60  the males become quite vocal during the breeding season , with the song frequency reaching its height prior to mating and then decreasing after copulation .
61  both sexes share a series of calls that are used in both defence of nests , interspecies competition , and communication between breeding pairs while foraging .
62 when foraging during the breeding season , mated pairs constantly communicate with each other using a series of high pitched chirping calls .
63 === diet ===blue-headed vireos are mainly insectivorous birds but are also known to eat fleshy berries and fruit .
64  they are equipped with short , strong bills used for processing insect prey with a tough carapace such as beetles .
65  foraging usually occurs in the mid level of trees .
66  a foraging blue-headed vireo will hop from branch to branch on the same or to an adjacent tree and will then fly towards its prey to capture it .
67  typical prey consist mostly of caterpillars , butterflies and moths but may also include tree bugs , stink bugs , beetles , bees , ants , flies , dragonflies , grasshoppers , crickets , spiders and , on some occasions , snails .
68  fruit feeding occurs primarily during migration and overwintering , especially when overwintering in more tropical regions where fruit is more abundant or if the insect populations are low .
69  this large and varied diet is an example of an opportunistic feeding strategy , allowing the blue-headed vireo to be plastic in its ability to adapt to resource availability .
70 === reproduction ===when arriving to the breeding ground in mid-april , male vireos will hold large , individual territories that can range from {convert|1.5|-|6.6|ha|acre|abbr=off} .
71  females will choose a male to mate with depending on the males ability to defend and control a large territory .
72  while defending their territory from other males , the male vireos will sing a primary song to attract females .
73  undecided females can usually be seen flying along the edges of competing male territories; usually this will force the two males into direct conflict for the right to copulate with the female .
74 once a female has approached a suitable mate , the male will perform a series of mating rituals .
75  typically , these rituals involve the male building a courtship nest for the female .
76  the courtship nest is not a full nest but is most likely an attempt by the male to display his ability to gather resources .
77  once the pair is established , the courtship nest is abandoned .
78  mating does not occur for approximately 2 weeks after pair has been established .
79  during this time , the male and the female will cooperatively build a breeding nest which is typically formed between forking mid-level branches of evergreen and deciduous trees and are composed of twigs and foliage .
80  breeding nests are not reused in following breeding seasons .
81 in one breeding season , a female will lay 35 eggs at a rate of 1 egg per day .
82  eggs are creamy white with brown or black spots and are 1723.1 x 13.315.8 mm (0.0550.075 in x 0.040.05 in) .
83  eggs are incubated for approximately 14 days after being laid .
84  once hatched , infants are highly altricial , often having little to no downy feathers .
85  infants open their eyes during day 5 or 6 and will begin to fledge after 14 days for a total chick-rearing period of 28 days .
86  once the young are able to leave the nest , the parents will split the juveniles and separate .
87  juveniles are usually dependent on the parent to provide food for approximately 1 month after leaving the nest .
88  if the nest is destroyed or a mating pair produces a failed brood , an attempt to re-nest may occur but this ultimately depends on when the brood fails .
89  if the brood fails early on in the season , there is a higher chance that the pair will re-nest , if later , the pair will often separate and not attempt a second brood .
90 blue-headed vireos have an atypical breeding strategy when compared to other closely related species .
91  blue-headed vireo males will assist their mates with daytime incubation of eggs , nest construction , and feeding of the chicks .
92  also , unlike most bird species , female blue-headed vireos do not attempt any extra-pair copulations with other males .
93  likewise , males make no attempt to guard females from other males , making blue-headed vireos both socially and genetically monogamous birds .
94 ==== hormonal effects on parental care ====the increase in male blue-headed vireo parental care is thought to be attributed to the levels of testosterone and prolactin found in the plasma of these birds during the mating season .
95  testosterone , a steroid hormone that is secreted by the testes , has been found to increase aggressive behaviour in male birds during the breeding season and that these males display less parental care if their testosterone levels are maintained .
96  conversely , prolactin is a peptide hormone that is regulated by the hypothalamus that has been found at higher levels in birds that do the majority of incubation .
97  it was found that in the early breeding season , male blue-headed vireos have a low testosterone level and will maintain this low level at all stages of the season .
98  this low level does not affect the vireos ability to compete with other males for territory however , as a high testosterone level has been found to not be necessary for territory establishment .
99  prolactin levels of the males were found to be high very early on in the breeding season and are maintained for the duration of the season .
100  this high level of prolactin along with a low testosterone level , explains why male blue-headed vireos are so involved in the construction of the nest , daytime incubation , and feeding of the nestlings .
101 === predation ===blue-headed vireos have a low nesting success rate , with about 1030% of hatchlings surviving .
102  common predators of the blue-headed vireo eggs and chicks include blue jays , crows , and squirrels .
103 often , when a nest is attacked by a blue jay , the male and female will execute coordinated attacks on the approaching predator .
104  this usually involves one partner swooping towards the blue jay while calling the mate who will then execute a second attack .
105  blue-headed vireos have also been known to nest close to nesting raptorial birds that do not prey on them .
106  it is thought that they use the raptors as protection from squirrels that are , in turn , hunted by the these bird of prey .
107 the largest contributor to the low nesting success rate of the blue-headed vireo is most likely the parasitic brown-headed cowbird (molothrus ater) .
108  these birds will often lay their large eggs overtop the existing brood , causing the parents to feed the cowbird which will ultimately starve the infant vireos .
