0 the steller's jay (cyanocitta stelleri) is a jay native to western north america , closely related to the blue jay found in the rest of the continent , but with a black head and upper body .
1  it is also known as the long-crested jay , mountain jay , and pine jay .
2  it is the only crested jay west of the rocky mountains .
3  while it does not have as prominent a crest the blue jay (cyanocitta cristata) can be found west of the rockies especially in south east britsh columbia .
4 the steller's jay shows a great deal of regional variation throughout its range .
5 [2] blackish-brown-headed birds from the north gradually become bluer-headed farther south .
6  the steller's jay has a more slender bill and longer legs than the blue jay and has a much more pronounced crest .
7  it is also somewhat larger .
8  the head is blackish-brown with light blue streaks on the forehead .
9  this dark coloring gives way from the shoulders and lower breast to silvery blue .
10  the primaries and tail are a rich blue with darker barring .
11 it occurs in coniferous forest over much of the western half of north america from alaska in the north to northern nicaragua[3] completely replacing the blue jay in most of those areas .
12  some hybridization with the blue jay in colorado has been reported .
13  the steller's jay lives in coniferous and mixed woodland , but not in completely dense forest , and requires open space .
14  it typically lives in flocks of greater than 10 individuals .
15  in autumn , flocks often visit oak woods when acorns are ripe .
16 habitatthe steller's jay primarily lives in coniferous forests but can be found in many forested areas .
17  they can be found in low to moderate elevations as high as the tree line , but rarely go that high .
18  steller's jays are common in residential and agricultural areas with nearby forests .
19 [4]steller's jays are omnivores; their diet is about two-thirds plant matter and one third animal matter .
20  food is gathered from both the ground and from trees .
21  the steller's jay's diet consists of a wide range of seeds , nuts , berries and other fruit .
22  many types of invertebrates , small rodents , eggs and nestlings such as those of the marbled murrelet are also eaten .
23  there are some accounts of them eating small reptiles , both snakes and lizards .
24 [4] acorns and conifer seeds are staples during the non-breeding season; these are often cached in the ground or in trees for later consumption .
25  they exploit human-provided food sources , frequently scavenging picnics and camp sites .
26  steller's jays will visit feeders and prefer black-oil sunflower seeds , white striped sunflower seeds , cracked corn , shelled raw peanuts and are especially attracted to whole raw peanuts .
27  suet is also consumed but mostly in the winter season .
28 breedingthe nest is usually in a conifer but is sometimes built in a hollow in a tree .
29  similar in construction to the blue jay's nest , it tends to be a bit larger (25 to 43 cm (9.8 to 16.9 in)), using a number of natural materials or scavenged trash , often mixed with mud .
30  between two and six eggs are laid during breeding season .
31  the eggs are oval in shape with a somewhat glossy surface .
32  the background colour of the egg shell tends to be pale variations of greenish-blue with brown- or olive-coloured speckles .
33  the clutch is usually incubated entirely by the female for about 16 days .
34 [5] the male feeds the female during this time .
35  though they are known to be loud , during nesting they are quiet in order to not attract attention .
36  [6]vocalizationslike other jays , the steller's jay has numerous and variable vocalizations .
37  one common call is a harsh shack-sheck-sheck-sheck-sheck-sheck series; another skreeka! skreeka! call sounds almost exactly like an old-fashioned pump handle; yet another is a soft , breathy hoodle hoodle whistle .
38  its alarm call is a harsh , nasal wah .
39  some calls are sex-specific: females produce a rattling sound , while males make a high-pitched gleep gleep .
40 the steller's jay also is a noted vocal mimic .
41  it can mimic the vocalizations of many species of birds , other animals , and sounds of non-animal origin .
42  it often will imitate the calls from birds of prey such as the red-tailed hawk , red-shouldered hawk , and osprey , causing other birds to seek cover and flee feeding areas .
43 [3][4]this bird is named after the german naturalist georg wilhelm steller , the first european to record them in 1741.[2][7]provincial birdthe steller's jay is the provincial bird of british columbia .
44 phylogenysteller's jay (cyanocitta stelleri)[8] is one of two species in the genus cyanocitta , the other species being the blue jay (cyanocitta cristata) .
45  the cyanocitta genus in turn belongs to the family corvidae , which consists of the crows , ravens , rooks , jackdaws , jays , magpies , treepies , choughs , and nutcrackers , for a total of over 120 species .
46  the closest relatives of the corvidae are the shrikes (laniidae), and birds-of-paradise (paradisaeidae) .
47 there are 17 subspecies from alaska to nicaragua , 8 found north of mexico .
48  to name a few: c .
49  s .
50  macrolopha of the central and southern rockies , c .
51  s .
52  stelleri (pacific coast from alaska to southwestern british columbia), and the largest subspecies , c .
53  s .
54  carlottae , from the queen charlotte islands .
