0 clark's nutcracker (nucifraga columbiana), sometimes referred to as clark's crow or woodpecker crow , is a passerine bird in the family corvidae .
1  it is slightly smaller than its eurasian relative the spotted nutcracker (n .
2  caryocatactes) .
3  it is ashy-grey all over except for the black-and-white wings and central tail feathers (the outer ones are white) .
4  the bill , legs and feet are also black .
5  this bird derives its name from the explorer william clark .
6 ==range====food==the most important food resources for this species are the seeds of pines (pinus sp .
7 ), principally the two cold-climate (high altitude) species of white pine (pinus subgenus strobus) with large seeds p .
8  albicaulis and p .
9  flexilis , but also using other high-altitude species like p .
10  balfouriana , p .
11  longaeva and p .
12  monticola .
13  during migrations to lower altitudes , it also extensively uses the seeds of pinyon pines .
14  the isolated cerro potos population is strongly associated with the local endemic potosi pinyon pinus culminicola .
15  all clark's nutcrackers have a sublingual pouch capable of holding around 50150 seeds , depending on the size of the seeds; the pouch greatly enhances the birds' ability to transport and store seeds .
16 clark's nutcrackers store seeds , usually in the ground for later consumption , in caches of 115 seeds (average of 34 seeds) .
17  depending on the cone crop as well as the tree species , a single clark's nutcracker can cache as many as 98,000 seeds per season .
18  the birds regularly store more than they actually need as an insurance against seed theft by other animals (squirrels , etc .
19 ), as well as low availability of alternative foods; this surplus seed is left in the cache , and may be able to germinate and grow into new trees , if the conditions are right .
20  through this activity of caching and over-storing , the bird is perpetuating its own habitat .
21  closely tied in with this storage behavior is the bird's remarkable long-term spatial memory; they are able to relocate caches of seeds with remarkable accuracy , even nine months later , and even when the cache sites are buried under up to a meter (3 ft) of snow .
22 the diet also includes a wide range of insect prey , berries and other fruits , small mammals and occasionally flesh from carcasses .
23  eggs and nestlings are sometimes devoured , and peanuts and suet have become a favorite at bird tables .
24  food is taken both from the ground and from trees , where the nutcrackers are very agile among the branches .
25  the birds are able to extract food by clasping pine cones in such a way that the cones are held between one or both feet .
26  the birds then hack the cones open with their strong bills .
27  rotten logs are also hacked into in order to locate large beetle grubs , and animal dung may be flipped over in search of insects .
28  clark's nutcrackers can also be opportunistic feeders in developed areas , and are known to some as "camp robbers" .
29 ==nesting==the species usually nests in pines or other types of conifers during early spring .
30  two to four eggs are laid , incubation usually occurring in 1618 days .
31  incubation is performed by both the male and female parents , and the young are typically fledged by around the 22nd day .
32  the fledglings follow their parents around for several months , possibly in order to learn the complex seed storage behavior .
33 ==whitebark pine mutualism==clark's nutcracker is the primary seed disperser for whitebark pine (pinus albicaulis) .
34  whitebark pine is in decline throughout its range , due to infection by white pine blister rust (cronartium ribicola), widespread outbreaks of mountain pine beetle , and the long-term effects of fire suppression .
35  the clark's nutcracker is an integral part of the whitebark pine restoration process: the clark's nutcracker must remain in whitebark pine forests and cache the seeds in excess , so that healthy whitebark pine will continue to grow .
36  if whitebark pine declines into extinction , the clark's nutcracker will lose an important source of food and may no longer be seen in areas where whitebark pine is the primary source of seed , such as glacier national park .
37 ==other facts==the voice of this bird is extremely varied and produces many different sounds .
38  however , the most frequent call is commonly described as ''khraaaa-khraaaa" .
