The vermilion flycatcher (Pyrocephalus rubinus) is a small passerine bird in the Tyrannidae, or tyrant flycatcher family. Most flycatchers are rather drab, but the vermilion flycatcher is a striking exception. It is a favorite with birders, but is not generally kept in aviculture, as the males tend to lose their vermilion coloration when in captivity.

Description

The vermilion flycatcher is a small bird, measuring 13–14 cm (5.1–5.5 in) in length, with a mass between 11 and 14 g (0.39 and 0.49 oz).[2] It strongly dimorphic; males are bright red, with dark brown plumage. Females have a peach-colored belly with a dark gray upperside, and are similar to Say's phoebe.

Gallery

Distribution and habitat

Vermilion flycatchers generally prefer somewhat open areas, and are found in trees or shrubs in savannah, scrub, agricultural areas, riparian woodlands, and desert as well, but usually near water. Their range includes almost all of Mexico; it extends north into the southwestern United States, and south to scattered portions of Central America, parts of northwestern and central South America, and on southwards to central Argentina. They are also found in the Galápagos Islands. It has ranged as far north as Canada.[5]

Behavior

Feeding

The flycatchers feed mostly on insects such as flies, grasshoppers and beetles. These are usually taken in mid-air, after a short sally flight from a perch.[6] It is an opportunistic feeder, and has been observed eating small fish.[7]

Breeding


Female on nest
The vermilion flycatcher's nest is a shallow cup made of small twigs and soft materials, lined with hair; the nest's rim is often covered with lichen. Typically located within 6 ft (1.8 m) of the ground, the nest is placed in the horizontal fork of a tree branch.[8] They lay two or three whitish eggs in a nest made of twigs, stems and roots, and lined with hair. The eggs are incubated for around two weeks by the female and the young are ready to leave the nest 15 days after hatching.

Conservation and threats

Because of its enormous range and sizable population—estimated as ranging between 5,000,000 and 50,000,000 individuals—the vermilion flycatcher is listed as a species of least concern by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature, despite the fact that its overall numbers are declining.[1] Some of its subspecies, however, are known to be in trouble. P. r. dubius, which was once reportedly common on San Cristóbal, has not been recorded from that island since the mid-1980s, and is thought to be extinct.[4] The other Galápagos subspecies, P. r. nanus, is also declining precipitously, principally as a result of the spread of the nonnative smooth-billed ani across the archipelago.[9] The ani is known to be predatory, sometimes killing (though apparently not eating) nestling flycatchers.[10]

The flycatcher is also an occasional victim of brood parasitism by brown-headed cowbirds.[11]

