The blue grosbeak (Passerina caerulea, formerly Guiraca caerulea)[3], is a medium-sized seed-eating bird in the same family as the northern cardinal, "tropical" or New World buntings, and "cardinal-grosbeaks" or New World grosbeaks.

The male blue grosbeak is a beautiful bird, being almost entirely deep blue. The female is mostly brown. Both sexes are distinguished by their large, deep bill and double wing bars. These features, as well as the grosbeak's relatively larger size, distinguish this species from the indigo bunting. Length can range from 14 to 19 cm (5.5 to 7.5 in) and wingspan is from 26 to 29 cm (10 to 11 in).[2][3] Body mass is typically from 26 to 31.5 g (0.92 to 1.11 oz).[4]

This is a migratory bird, with nesting grounds across most of the southern half of the United States and much of northern Mexico, migrating south to Central America and in very small numbers to northern South America; the southernmost record comes from eastern Ecuador. It eats mostly insects, but it will also eat snails, spiders, seeds, grains, and wild fruits. The blue grosbeak forages on the ground and in shrubs and trees.

Habitat

This species is found in partly open habitat with scattered trees, riparian woodland, scrub, thickets, cultivated lands, woodland edges, overgrown fields, or hedgerows. It nests in a low tree or bush or a tangle of vegetation, usually about 1–3 m (3.3–9.8 ft) above ground, often at the edge of an open area.

A large, vibrantly blue bunting with an enormous silver bill and chestnut wingbars, the male Blue Grosbeak sings a rich, warbling song from trees and roadside wires. He and his cinnamon-colored mate often raise two broods of nestlings in a single breeding season. A bird of shrubby habitats, these richly colored birds can be hard to spot unless you hear them singing first. They are widespread but not abundant across the southern U.S., and are expanding their range.

Size & Shape
The Blue Grosbeak is a stocky songbird with a very large, triangular bill that seems to cover the entire front of its face, from throat to forehead.

Color Pattern
Adult males are deep, rich blue with a tiny black mask in front of the eyes, chestnut wingbars, and a black-and-silver beak. Females are primarily rich cinnamon-brown. The color is richer on the head, paler on the underparts; their tails are bluish. Both sexes have two wingbars; the upper is chestnut and the lower is grayish to buffy. Immature Blue Grosbeaks tend to a rich, dark chestnut brown, with chestnut wingbars.

Behavior
Blue Grosbeaks are unobtrusive despite their bright colors, although in summer males frequently sing their pleasant, rich, warbling songs. Often they sing while perched at high points in the shrubs and small trees of their generally open or shrubby habitats. Listen for their loud, almost metallic chink call. Also watch for this species’ odd habit of twitching its tail sideways.

Habitat
Blue Grosbeaks are characteristic species of old fields beginning to grow back into woodland. They breed in areas covered in a mix of grass, forbs, and shrubs, with usually a few taller trees. In more-arid areas, they often use the shrubby growth along watercourses.