The lazuli bunting (Passerina amoena) is a North American songbird named for the gemstone lapis lazuli.

The male is easily recognized by its bright blue head and back (lighter than the closely related indigo bunting), its conspicuous white wingbars, and its light rusty breast and white belly. The color pattern may suggest the eastern and western bluebirds, but the smaller size (13–14 cm or 5–5.5 inches long), wingbars, and short and conical bunting bill quickly distinguish it. The female is brown, grayer above and warmer underneath, told from the female indigo bunting by two thin and pale wingbars and other plumage details.

The song is a high, rapid, strident warble, similar to that of the indigo bunting but longer and with less repetition.


Upper figure, male; lower, female
Lazuli buntings breed mostly west of the 100th meridian from southern Canada to northern Texas, central New Mexico and Arizona, and southern California. On the Pacific coast their breeding range extends south to extreme northwestern Baja California. They migrate to southeastern Arizona and Mexico. Their habitat is brushy areas and sometimes weedy pastures, generally well-watered, and sometimes in towns.

These birds eat mostly seeds and insects. They may feed conspicuously on the ground or in bushes, but singing males are often very elusive in treetops.

This bird makes a loose cup nest of grasses and rootlets placed in a bush. It lays three or four pale blue eggs. In the eastern and southern part of its range, it often hybridizes with the indigo bunting.

A beautifully colored bird, the Lazuli Bunting is common in shrubby areas throughout the American West.

Adult Description
Small songbird.
Short, thick bill.
Two wingbars.
Breeding male with blue head and back, red chest, and white belly.
Female and nonbreeding male dull brown.
Male Description
Breeding (Alternate) Plumage: Head deep blue. Upper chest reddish. Lower chest, belly, and under tail white. One large and one narrow white wingbar. Black in front of eyes. Wing feathers dark, edged in blue. 
Nonbreeding (Basic) Plumage: Buffy overall. Blue feathers tipped with buff on back and face. Blue, reddish, and white feathers tipped with buff on front.
Female Description
Grayish brown head, nape, and back. Rump brown tinged with light blue. Bluish tint on shoulders. Two pale tan or whitish wingbars. Faint rust band across breast, blending to lighter brown lower on belly. Wing and tail feathers brown with slightly blue-tinged edges.
Immature Description
Similar to adult, but first-year male tends to have paler and duller blue feathers with brown or buff tips, especially on head, nape, and back, resulting in variable dull blue-brown, blotchy appearance.

Conservation status	Widespread and common, numbers apparently stable.
Family	Cardinals
Habitat	Open brush, streamside shrubs. Breeds in brushy areas with open grassy ground nearby, such as patches of scrub oak, chaparral, streamside thickets, sometimes in areas of sagebrush or pinyon-juniper woods. In migration and winter, occurs in weedy fields, open woods, brushy places.
Around thickets and streamside trees of the West, this sky-blue bunting is common in summer. Males are conspicuous in summer, singing in the open, but the plainer brown females are far more elusive as they tend their nests in the thick bushes. During migration, flocks are more easily observed as they forage in brushy fields. Where Lazuli and Indigo buntings overlap in breeding range, on the Great Plains and parts of the Southwest, they often interbreed.
Photo Gallery

Feeding Behavior

Forages mainly on the ground, also up in low growth. May bend grass stalks down to the ground to eat the seeds from them. Sometimes takes insects from foliage while hovering.

3-5, usually 4. Pale bluish white, unmarked. Incubation is by female only, about 12 days. Young: At some nests, nestlings are fed entirely by the female, although at others the male helps to feed them. Young leave the nest about 10-12 days after hatching. Male may feed the young more after they fledge, while female begins second nesting attempt. 2 broods per year, perhaps sometimes 3.

Young

At some nests, nestlings are fed entirely by the female, although at others the male helps to feed them. Young leave the nest about 10-12 days after hatching. Male may feed the young more after they fledge, while female begins second nesting attempt. 2 broods per year, perhaps sometimes 3.
Mostly seeds and insects. More than half of summer diet may be insects, including grasshoppers, caterpillars, beetles, true bugs, wild bees, ants, and others. Also eats many seeds, mainly those of grasses, also weed seeds and waste grain; seeds may make up most of winter diet. Young are fed mostly insects.

Nesting

Male sings to defend nesting territory. Where Lazuli and Indigo buntings overlap in range, they will defend territories against each other. Nest: Placed in shrubs, vines, or low trees, usually 2-4' above the ground, firmly attached to vertical stems or to forked branch. Nest (built by female) is an open cup of grass, weeds, leaves, lined with fine grass and sometimes animal hair.
MeasureMeasure
