The hooded oriole (Icterus cucullatus) is a medium-sized New World oriole.

Description and ecology

Adults have a curved bill which is completely black and white wing bars. The adult male has a deep yellowish orange head with black on the face and throat; they are black on the back, wings and tail, orange on the underparts. The adult female is olive-green on the upper parts, yellowish on the breast and belly. Their calls consist of whistling and wheets, while their song is a mixture of both.


Juvenile in California, United States
Their breeding habitat is open areas with trees, especially palms, across the Southwestern United States and northern Mexico. The nest is a tightly woven pouch attached to the underside of a leaf or tree branch. Sometimes their nest is filled with the egg of a Brown-headed cowbird which is parasite bird that lays its eggs in other birds nests for that species to take care of.

These birds migrate in flocks south to Mexico's southwestern coast; they are permanent residents in Baja California Sur, the Mexican east coast, and Belize. Some may over-winter near feeders. They can also be found in Southern California neighborhoods, but are rare in the winter.

They forage in trees and shrubs, also feeding from flowers. It is a nectar robber because it pierces the base of the flower, and does not assist in pollination. These birds mainly eat insects, nectar and fruit, and will also visit hummingbird feeders and bird feeders for seeds.

Conservation status	Declined sharply in southern Texas in recent decades, perhaps owing to cowbird parasitism. May be making a slight comeback in that area. Still fairly common farther west.
Family	Blackbirds and Orioles
Habitat	Open woods, shade trees, palms. Breeds in groves of trees (such as cottonwood, walnut, sycamore) along streams and in canyons, and in open woods in lowlands. Often common in suburbs and city parks. Especially favors palm trees, and will nest in isolated groups of palms even in cities.
In the hot lowlands of the Southwest, this slim oriole is often common in the trees along streams and in suburbs. It is especially likely to be seen around palms, frequently attaching its hanging nest to the underside of a palm frond. In yards and gardens it often visits hummingbird feeders to drink the sugar-water. The jumbled, musical song of the male sometimes includes imitations of other birds.
Photo Gallery

Feeding Behavior

Forages rather slowly and deliberately in trees and large shrubs, gleaning insects from among foliage or feeding on berries. Regularly probes in flowers for nectar and probably takes insects there as well. A common visitor to hummingbird feeders.

4, sometimes 3-5. Whitish, irregularly blotched with brown, lavender, and gray. Incubation is by female, about 12-14 days. Bronzed Cowbirds very frequently lay eggs in nests of this species. Young: Fed by both parents. Leave nest about 14 days after hatching. 2 broods per year, sometimes 3.

Young

Fed by both parents. Leave nest about 14 days after hatching. 2 broods per year, sometimes 3.
Includes insects, berries, nectar. Feeds on a variety of insects. May especially favor caterpillars, also eats beetles, wasps, ants, and many others. Feeds on many wild berries, and sometimes on cultivated fruit. Takes nectar from flowers, and will come to feeders to drink sugar-water.

Nesting

In courtship, male moves around female, posturing with deep bows and then pointing bill straight up while singing softly. Female may respond with similar posturing. Nest: Often placed in palm or large yucca, sewn to underside of large overhanging leaf; usually 10-50' above ground, but can be lower. Sometimes placed under banana leaf, in clump of mistletoe or Spanish moss, or suspended from branch of deciduous tree. Nest is a woven hanging pouch of grass and plant fibers, lined with plant down, hair, feathers. Female builds nest, but male may help bring material.