A small pale bird of the high Arctic, the Hoary Redpoll is a rare winter visitor to southern Canada and the northern United States. During redpoll invasions, a few paler Hoary Redpolls can sometimes be spotted within flocks of Common Redpolls.
Adult Description
A very small pale finch.
Bill small and conical.
Chin black.
Forehead red.
Rump white.
Undertail white.
Immature Description
Immature male resembles adult female.



Conservation status	Still common and widespread, but like other birds in the high Arctic, may be vulnerable to the effects of climate change.
Family	Finches
Habitat	Thickets, tundra scrub. In winter, also woodland edges, fields. Breeds in brushy places of far North, especially in low thickets of willow, alder, or dwarf birch on open tundra, sometimes along forest edge. Compared to Common Redpoll, tends to nest in more open or barren habitat. In winter, also found around woodland edges, brushy or weedy fields.
A very close relative of the Common Redpoll, but adapted to even bleaker conditions, the Hoary Redpoll is only a scarce visitor south of the Arctic. In those winters when large numbers of redpolls invade southward, a few Hoarys are usually mixed into the flocks. On the breeding grounds, this species extends farther north, onto high Arctic islands of Canada. Where the two redpolls overlap, the Hoary tends to nest on more barren upland tundra, where the patches of shrubs are fewer and smaller.
Photo Gallery

FEEDING. Diet and feeding behavior very similar to those of Common Redpoll

Nesting

Does not seem to defend nesting territories; several pairs may nest fairly close together, perhaps because good nesting sites tend to be concentrated in small patches surrounded by tundra. In courtship, male feeds female. Nest: Placed within a few feet of the ground in dense low shrubs, sometimes on the ground. Nest (built by female) is a small open cup of grass and plant down, sometimes with fine twigs, rootlets, leaves, lined with ptarmigan feathers and sometimes animal hair.
MeasureMeasure
