0 blue-winged tealdescription: male blue-winged teal have a slate gray head and neck , a black-edged white crescent in front of the eyes and a blackish crown .
1  the breast and sides are tan with dark brown speckles and there is a white spot on the side of the rump .
2  most of the upper wing coverts are blue-gray , the secondaries form an iridescent green speculum and the underwing is whitish .
3  the bill is black and the legs and feet are yellowish to orange .
4  the male has a thin whistled "tsee tsee" uttered both in flight and when on water .
5  female blue-winged teal have a brownish-gray head with a darker crown and eye stripe .
6  the breast and sides are brown , the upper parts are olive brown , and the upper wing coverts are bluish , but less vibrant than the drake .
7  the bill is gray-black and the legs and feet are dull yellow-brown .
8  the female has a high-pitched squeak .
9 breeding: blue-winged teal breed primarily in the northern prairies and parklands of central north america .
10  their relative abundance generally increases from west to east and north to south within the prairie pothole region .
11  nesting habitat includes wetland areas within grasslands , such as shallow marshes , sloughs , flooded ditches and temporary ponds .
12  females change breeding sites from year to year in response to changing wetland conditions and lay an average of 10 eggs .
13 migrating and wintering: blue-winged teal are generally the first ducks south in the fall and the last north in the spring .
14  they migrate from the prairie pothole region to wintering areas in florida , the caribbean islands , the gulf coast of texas and louisiana , mexico and central and south america .
15  wintering habitats are diverse , including mangrove swamps , fresh and brackish estuaries and shallow wetlands .
16  in the united states , the highest winter densities occur in southern texas and peninsular florida .
17  blue-winged teal are common in winter from central america , the caribbean and south america south to peru and northeastern brazil .
18  they also stay regularly in small numbers in the galapagos islands and are vagrants to chile , southeastern brazil , uruguay and argentina (scott and carbonell , 1986) .
19 population: since 1955, blue-winged teal populations have ranged from 2.8 million to 7.4 million .
20  generally , numbers have increased in recent years , due to favorable prairie wetland conditions .
21  this has resulted in an average population of 6 million during the past 10 years (u.s.
23  fish and wildlife service , 2009) .
24  blue-winged teal have the highest annual mortality rate (reaching 65 percent) of all the dabbling ducks , possibly as a result of hunting and long over-ocean migration .
25 food habits: blue-winged teal dabble to feed on the vegetative parts of aquatic plants (algae , duckweeds , pondweeds , etc .
26 ), seeds (sedges , pondweeds , grasses , etc .
27 ) and large amounts of aquatic invertebrates found in shallowly flooded wetlands .
