0 costa's hummingbird (calypte costae) is a species of hummingbird .
1 this species is very small , a mature adult growing to only 33.5 in (7.68.9 cm) in length .
2  the male costa's has a mainly green back and flanks , a small black tail and wings , and patches of white below their gorgeted throat and tail .
3  its most distinguishing feature is its vibrant purple cap and throat with the throat feathers flaring out and back behind its head .
4  the female costa's hummingbird is not as distinct as the male , having grayish-green above with a white underbelly .
5 costa's hummingbird is fairly common in the arid brushy deserts and any nearby gardens of the southwestern united states and the baja california peninsula of mexico .
6 the male costa's hummingbird's courtship display is a spirited series of swoops and arcing dives , carefully utilizing a proper angle to the sun to show off his violet plumage to impress prospective mates .
7  each high-speed dive will also pass within inches of the female , perched on a nearby branch , which will be accented by a high-pitched shriek that is produced by the tail .
8  separately , the male will perch and produce similar sounds in his song-- except , the song is vocal rather than tail-generated .
9 costa's hummingbird constructs a small cup-shaped nest out of plant fibers and down and coated with lichen to hold it together .
10 [2] the nest will be situated above ground on a yucca stalk or tree limb .
11  the female lays just two eggs , which are white in color , which she will incubate for 15 to 18 days before the young hatch .
12  the young costa's hummingbirds leave the nest after 20 to 23 days .
13 like all other hummingbird species , costa's hummingbird feeds on flower nectar and any tiny insects that it happens to find in the flower petals .
14  as with other species , it can slow down its metabolism during cold nights when it enters a hibernation-like state known as torpor and its heart and respiration rate are dramatically slowed .
15 hybrids between this bird and anna's hummingbird , the black-chinned hummingbird as well as the broad-tailed hummingbird are known .
16 [3]the binomial commemorates french nobleman louis marie pantaleon costa , marquis de beauregard (18061864) .
