0 the calliope hummingbird (selasphorus calliope) is a very small hummingbird native to the united states and canada and , during winter , central america .
1  it was previously considered the only member of the genus stellula , but recent evidence suggests placement in the genus selasphorus .
2 [2] this bird was named after the greek muse calliope .
3  the genus name means "little star" .
4 descriptionthis is the smallest breeding bird found in canada and the united states .
5  the only smaller species ever found in the u.s.
7  is the bumblebee hummingbird , an accidental vagrant from mexico .
8  an adult calliope hummingbird can measure 710 cm (2.83.9 in) in length , span 11 cm (4.3 in) across the wings and weigh 2 to 3 g (0.071 to 0.106 oz) .
9 [3][4] these birds have glossy green on the back and crown with white underparts .
10  their bill and tail are relatively short .
11  the adult male has wine-red streaks on the throat , green flanks and a dark tail .
12  females and immatures have a pinkish wash on the flanks , dark streaks on the throat and a dark tail with white tips .
13  the only similar birds are the rufous hummingbird and the allen's hummingbird , but these birds are larger with more distinct and contrasting rufous markings on tail and flanks , and longer central tail feathers .
14 habitat and distributionthe breeding habitat of calliope hummingbird is varied among open shrub habitats and altitudes .
15  nesting usually occurs at higher altitudes in the rocky mountains .
16  nests have been observed from as low as 300 m (980 ft) in washington elevation to the tree line at over 3,000 m (9,800 ft) .
17  in montana , the minimum elevation observed for breeding is 1,200 m (3,900 ft) .
18 [4][5] open montane forest , mountain meadows , and willow and alder thickets may variously serve as breeding grounds .
19  during migration and winter , they also occur in chaparral , lowland brushy areas , deserts and semi-desert regions .
20  they nest in western north america from southern british columbia and alberta south to colorado and southern california .
21  during spring and summer , they move , mainly through arizona and new mexico and northern mexico , to winter in southwestern mexico as well as in guatemala and belize .
22 [citation needed]calliopes have been identified in fort tryon park , new york and one was identified and banded in new haven , connecticut in december 2006.[6][7]behaviorfemale feeding insects to chickscalliope hummingbirds are a migratory bird , generally leaving their breeding grounds earlier than most birds (although not as early as the rufous hummingbird) to take advantage of the late-summer wildflowers in the mountains of western north america .
23  they are believed to be the smallest-bodied long distance migrant in the world .
24 [3]these birds feed on nectar from flowers using a long extendable tongue , drink sap from holes created by sapsuckers or catch insects on the wing .
25  while collecting nectar , they also assist in plant pollination .
26 [5] plants preferred for pollinating include paintbrush , penstemon , columbine , trumpet gilia , and elephant head .
27  they will also occasionally catch and eat small insects and spiders .
28 [4]adult males usually arrive on the breeding ground before females , from mid-april to early may .
29  the male claims and vigorously defends a nesting territory in which he will breed with many females .
30  the male takes no part in raising the young and often actually vacates the breeding grounds by the time the young hatch .
31  the female usually builds an open cup nest in a conifer tree under an overhanging branch , though apple and alder trees have also been used .
32  the nest is often built on the base of large pine cones and somewhat resembles a pine cone itself .
33  a nest may be used repeatedly over the course of several years .
34  two eggs are laid from late may to early july and are incubated for 15 to 16 days .
35 [5] the young are capable of flight about 20 days after hatching .
36 [4]courtship display and sonationduring courtship , a male calliope hummingbird hovers at accelerated wingbeat frequency up to 95 flaps per second (42% higher than normal hovering), creating a loud buzzing sound , with throat feathers protruding and facing a female .
37 [5][8] the male then ascends temporarily to 20 meters and dives at high speed , with the rapid descent causing sonation of wing and tail feathers combined with vocalization , intending to attract attention of the female .
38 [8] research in a wind tunnel demonstrated that the male courtship display includes sounds produced by three independent feather or vocal components , each with different acoustic characteristics , thus potentially containing different messages appealing to the female .
39 [8]statusa hovering male calliopemany species of pollinators , including the calliope hummingbird , have shown decreases in certain populations .
40  little information is available on the overall issues that are causing these declines but possible threats include habitat loss , increased use of pesticides , and replacement of native plants by non-native plants (although , on the other hand , many hummingbirds benefit from non-native plants in gardens that provide additional food) .
41  the restricted wintering range of calliope hummingbirds makes the species more susceptible to natural disasters , diseases , or land use changes that could wipe out significant portions of the population .
42  the calliope hummingbird has not been well studied , leaving much of its life history unknown .
