0 the rufous hummingbird (selasphorus rufus) is a small hummingbird , about 8 cm (3.1 in) long with a long , straight and slender bill .
1  these birds are known for their extraordinary flight skills , flying 2,000 mi (3,200 km) during their migratory transits .
2  it is one of seven species in the genus selasphorus .
3 descriptiona perched male rufous hummingbirdthe adult male has a white breast , rufous face , flanks and tail and an iridescent orange-red throat patch or gorget .
4  some males have some green on back and/or crown .
5  the female has green , white , some iridescent orange feathers in the center of the throat , and a dark tail with white tips and rufous base .
6 the female is slightly larger than the male .
7  females and the rare green-backed males are extremely difficult to differentiate from allen's hummingbird .
8  this is a typical-sized hummingbird , being a very small bird .
9  it weighs 25 g (0.0710.176 oz), measures 79 cm (2.83.5 in) long and spans 11 cm (4.3 in) across the wings .
10 [2]they feed on nectar from flowers using a long extendable tongue or catch insects on the wing .
11  these birds require frequent feeding while active during the day and become torpid at night to conserve energy .
12  because of their small size , they are vulnerable to insect-eating birds and animals .
13 breedingtheir primary breeding habitats are open areas , mountainsides and forest edges in western north america from southern alaska through british columbia and the pacific northwest to california ,[2] nesting further north (alaska) than any other hummingbird .
14  the female builds a nest in a protected location in a shrub or conifer .
15  males are promiscuous , mating with several females .
16 [2]migrationthis section needs additional citations for verification .
17  please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources .
18  unsourced material may be challenged and removed .
19  (december 2015) (learn how and when to remove this template message)a perched female rufous hummingbirdthey are migratory , many of them migrating through the rocky mountains and nearby lowlands during may to september to take advantage of the wildflower season .
20  they may stay in one local region for the entire summer , in which case the migrants , like breeding birds , often aggressively take over and defend feeding locations .
21  most winter in wooded areas in the mexican state of guerrero , traveling over 2,000 mi (3,200 km) by an overland route from its nearest summer home  a prodigious journey for a bird weighing only 3 to 4 g .
22 the western rufous hummingbird may stray into southeastern north america .
23  in the united states , a trend is for them to migrate for winter to warmer climates such as florida or on the gulf coast , rather than in mainland mexico .
24  they are known to land in the turks and caicos islands .
25 [citation needed] this southeastern wintering trend is resulting in increased survival , coordinated with insect availability and artificial feeders in gardens .
26  in the past , individuals that migrated eastward toward canada and the northern usa in error would usually die ,[citation needed] but now they often survive as they seem to spend more time in the warm gulf coast and florida .
27  provided sufficient food and shelter is available , they are surprisingly hardy , able to tolerate temperatures down to 20 c (4 f), so they can be seen in late fall in places such as the upper midwest , great lakes , and upper new england .
28 [citation needed] as winter comes , birds in these areas normally head due south to the warmer gulf coast and florida .
29 most rufous hummingbirds that migrate east are juvenile birds and adult females , with adult males seldom seen .
30  since juveniles or females are essentially indistinguishable from allen's hummingbirds unless confirmed by close inspection , eastern rufous migrants may be classified as "rufous/allen's hummingbirds" .
31 [2]hovering mechanics and metabolismrufous hummingbirddigital imaging velocimetry was used to capture rufous hummingbird wing movements on film , enabling determination that the bird supports its body weight during hovering primarily by wing downstrokes (75% of lift) rather than by upstrokes (25% of lift) .
32 [3][4] when hovering during fasting , rufous hummingbirds oxidize fatty acids to support metabolism and food energy requirements , but can rapidly switch to carbohydrate metabolism (within 40 minutes) after feeding on flower nectar .
