0 allen's hummingbird (selasphorus sasin) is a species of hummingbird .
1  it is a small bird , with mature adults reaching only 3 to 3.5 in (76 to 89 mm) in length .
2  the male has a green back and forehead , with rust-colored rufous flanks , rump , and tail .
3  the male's throat is also an iridescent orange-red .
4  the female and immature allen's hummingbirds are similarly colored , but lack the iridescent throat patch , instead having a series of speckles on their throats .
5  females are mostly green , featuring rufous color only on the tail , which also has white tips .
6  immature allen's hummingbirds are so similar to the female rufous hummingbird , the two are almost indistinguishable in the field .
7  both species' breeding seasons and ranges are common factors used to differentiate between the two species in a particular geographical area .
8 allen's hummingbird is common only in the brushy woods , gardens , and meadows of coastal california from santa barbara north , and a minuscule portion of lowersouthern oregon .
9  the nominate race of allen's hummingbird , s .
10  s .
11  sasin , is migratory , and winters along the pacific coast of central mexico .
12  a second ,s .
13  s .
14  sedentarius , is a permanent resident on the channel islands off southern california .
15  this population colonized the palos verdes peninsula of los angeles county in the 1960s and has since spread over much of los angeles and orange counties , south through san diego county , and east to the western end of riverside county (inland empire) .
16 the courtship flight of male allen's hummingbirds is a frantic back-and-forth flight arc of about 25 ft (7.6 m) similar to the motion of a swinging pendulum , followed by a high-speed dive from about 100 ft (30 m) .
17  the male is also highly aggressive and territorial .
18  hot-tempered despite its diminutive stature , male allen's hummingbirds will chase any other males from their territory , as well as any other hummingbird species , and have even been known to attack and rout predatory birds several times larger than themselves , such as kestrels and hawks .
19 allen's hummingbird constructs its nest out of plant fibers , down , and weed stems , coating the nest with lichens to give it structure .
20  the nest is placed above ground on a tree branch or the stalk or stem of a plant .
21  the female lays two white eggs , which she incubates for 15 to 17 days .
22  the young leave the nest about three weeks after hatching .
23  the mother continues to feed the fledglings for several more weeks , then the young are left to fend for themselves .
24 like all hummingbirds , allen's hummingbird's high rate of metabolism requires it to feed frequently , about every hour .
25  it drinks nectar from flowers and eats any small insects it finds crawling around the flower blossom , which provide it with needed protein .
26 the common name commemorates charles andrew allen (18411930), american collector and taxidermist .
27 a hybrid between this species and anna's hummingbird has been described as floresi's hummingbird , "selasphorus" floresii .
