0 the common merganser (north american) or goosander (eurasian) (mergus merganser) is a large duck of rivers and lakes in forested areas of europe , northern and central asia , and north america .
1  it eats fish and nests in holes in trees .
2  john james audubon also used the name "buff-breasted merganser" (in addition to "goosander") in his book the birds of america.2descriptionit is 5872 cm (2328 in) long with a 7897 cm (3138 in) wingspan and a weight of 0.92.1 kg (2.04.6 lb); males average slightly larger than females but with some overlap .
3  like other species in the genus mergus , it has a crest of longer head feathers , but these usually lie smoothly rounded behind the head , not normally forming an erect crest .
4  adult males in breeding plumage are easily distinguished , the body white with a variable salmon-pink tinge , the head black with an iridescent green gloss , the rump and tail grey , and the wings largely white on the inner half , black on the outer half .
5  females , and males in "eclipse" (non-breeding plumage , july to october) are largely grey , with a reddish-brown head , white chin , and white secondary feathers on the wing .
6  juveniles (both sexes) are similar to adult females but also show a short black-edged white stripe between the eye and bill .
7  the bill and legs are red to brownish-red , brightest on adult males , dullest on juveniles.345taxonomymale mergus merganser americanusthere are three subspecies , differing in only minor detail:34m .
8  m .
9  merganser  linnaeus , 1758: found throughout northern europe and northern asia .
10 m .
11  m .
12  orientalis  gould , 1845 (syn .
13  m .
14  m .
15  comatus  salvadori , 1895): found in the central asian mountains .
16  slightly larger than m .
17  m .
18  merganser , with a slenderer bill .
19 m .
20  m .
21  americanus  cassin , 1852: found in north america .
22  bill broader-based than in m .
23  m .
24  merganser , and a black bar crossing the white inner wing (visible in flight) on males .
25 behaviourfeedingfemale goosander's bill showing the serrated edgelike the other mergansers , these fish-feeding ducks have serrated edges to their bills to help them grip their prey , so they are often known as "sawbills" .
26  in addition to fish , they take a wide range of other aquatic prey , such as molluscs , crustaceans , worms , insect larvae , and amphibians; more rarely , small mammals and birds may be taken.34 as in other birds with the character , the salmon-pink tinge shown variably by males is probably diet-related , obtained from the carotenoid pigments present in some crustaceans and fish.6 when not diving for food , they are usually seen swimming on the water surface , or resting on rocks in midstream or hidden among riverbank vegetation , or (in winter) on the edge of floating ice.34in most places , the common merganser is as much a frequenter of salt water as fresh water .
27  in larger streams and rivers , they float down with the stream for a few miles , and either fly back again or more commonly fish their way back , diving incessantly the whole way .
28  in smaller streams , they are present in pairs or smaller groups , and they float down , twisting round and round in the rapids , or fishing vigorously in a deep pool near the foot of a waterfall or rapid .
29  when floating leisurely , they position themselves in water similar to ducks , but they also swim deep in water like cormorants , especially when swimming upstream .
30  they often sit on a rock in the middle of the water , similar to cormorants , often half-opening their wings to the sun .
31  to rise from water , they flap along the surface for many yards .
32  once they are airborne , the flight is strong and rapid.7 they often fish in a group forming a semicircle and driving the fish into shallow water , where they are captured easily .
33  their ordinary voice is a low , harsh croak , but during the breeding season , they (including the young) make a plaintive , soft whistle .
34  generally , they are wary , and one or more birds stay on sentry duty to warn the flock of approaching danger .
35  when disturbed , they often disgorge food before moving.8 though they move clumsily on land , they resort to running when pressed , assuming a very upright position similar to penguins , and falling and stumbling frequently.9m .
36  m .
37  americanus , female and juvenilesbreedingnesting is normally in a tree cavity , so it requires mature forest as its breeding habitat; they also readily use large nest boxes where provided , requiring an entrance hole 15 cm (5.9 in) in diameter.10 in places devoid of trees (like central asian mountains), they use holes in cliffs and steep , high banks , sometimes at considerable distances from the water.8 the female lays 617 (most often 812) white to yellowish eggs , and raises one brood in a season .
38  the ducklings are taken by their mother in her bill to rivers or lakes immediately after hatching , where they feed on freshwater invertebrates and small fish fry , fledging when 6070 days old .
39  the young are sexually mature at the age of two years.345movementsthe species is a partial migrant , with birds moving away from areas where rivers and major lakes freeze in the winter , but resident where waters remain open .
40  eastern north american birds move south in small groups to the united states wherever ice free conditions exist on lakes and rivers; on the milder pacific coast , they are permanent residents .
41  scandinavian and russian birds also migrate southwards , but western european birds , and a few in japan , are largely resident.34 in some populations , the males also show distinct moult migration , leaving the breeding areas as soon as the young hatch to spend the summer (june to september) elsewhere .
42  notably , most of the western european male population migrates north to estuaries in finnmark in northern norway (principally tanafjord) to moult , leaving the females to care for the ducklings .
43  much smaller numbers of males also use estuaries in eastern scotland as a moulting area.51112status and conservationrobert wilkinson padley - a goosander , 1817overall , the species is not threatened , though illegal persecution by game fishing interests is a problem in some areas.13within western europe , a marked southward spread has occurred from scandinavia in the breeding range since about 1850, colonising scotland in 1871, england in 1941, and also a strong increase in the population in the alps.5 they are very scarce in ireland , with regular breeding confined to a few pairs in county wicklow.14the goosander is one of the species to which the agreement on the conservation of african-eurasian migratory waterbirds applies .
