0 the summer tanager (piranga rubra), is a medium-sized american songbird .
1  formerly placed in the tanager family (thraupidae), it and other members of its genus are now classified in the cardinal family (cardinalidae) .
2 [2] the species's plumage and vocalizations are similar to other members of the cardinal family .
3 their breeding habitat is open wooded areas , especially with oaks , across the southern united states , extending as far north as iowa .
4  these birds migrate to mexico , central america and northern south america .
5  this tanager is an extremely rare vagrant to western europe .
6 adults have stout pointed bills and measure 17 cm (6.7 in) in length and 29 g (1.0 oz) in weight .
7 [3][4] adult males are rose red and similar in appearance to the hepatic tanager , although the latter has a dark bill; females are orangish on the underparts and olive on top , with olive-brown wings and tail .
8  as with all other birds , all red and orange colorations are acquired through their diet .
9 these birds are often out of sight , foraging high in trees , sometimes flying out to catch insects in flight .
10  they mainly eat insects , especially bees and wasps , and berries .
11  fruit of cymbopetalum mayanum (annonaceae) are an especially well-liked food in their winter quarters and birds will forage in human-altered habitat .
12 [5] consequently , these trees can be planted to entice them to residential areas , and they may well be attracted to bird feeders .
13  summer tanagers build a cup nest on a horizontal tree branch .
14 the only completely red bird in north america , the strawberry-colored male summer tanager is an eye-catching sight against the green leaves of the forest canopy .
15  the mustard-yellow female is harder to spot , though both sexes have a very distinctive chuckling call note .
16  fairly common during the summer , these birds migrate as far as the middle of south america each winter .
17  all year long they specialize in catching bees and wasps on the wing , somehow avoiding being stung by their catches .
18 size & shapesummer tanagers are medium-sized , chunky songbirds with big bodies and large heads .
19  they have large , thick , blunt-tipped bills .
20 color patternadult male summer tanagers are entirely bright red .
21  females and immature males are bright yellow-greenyellower on the head and underparts and slightly greener on the back and wings .
22  the bill is pale .
23  molting immature males can be patchy yellow and red .
24 behaviorsummer tanagers tend to stay fairly high in the forest canopy , where they sit still and then sally out to catch flying insects in midair , or move slowly along tree branches to glean food .
25  males have a sweet , whistling song similar to an american robin; both sexes give a distinctive pit-ti-tuck call note .
26 habitatthey breed near gaps and edges of open forests , particularly of deciduous trees or mixed pine-oak woodlands .
27  in the southwest , look for them along streams among willows , cottonwoods , mesquite , or saltcedar .
