0 the purple martin (progne subis) is the largest north american swallow .
1  these aerial acrobats have speed and agility in flight , and when approaching their housing , will dive from the sky at great speeds with their wings tucked .
2 description and taxonomypurple martins are a kind of swallow , of the genus progne .
3  like other members of this genus , they are larger than most of the other swallows .
4  the average length from bill to tail is 20 cm (7.9 in) .
5  adults have a slightly forked tail .
6  adult males are entirely black with glossy steel blue sheen , the only swallow in north america with such coloration .
7  adult females are dark on top with some steel blue sheen , and lighter underparts .
8  subadult females look similar to adult females minus the steel blue sheen and browner on the back .
9  subadult males look very much like females , but solid black feathers emerge on their chest in a blotchy , random pattern as they molt to their adult plumage .
10 [2]this species was first described by linnaeus in his systema naturae in 1758 as hirundo subis .
11 [3] the species of this genus are very closely related , and some view the purple martin , gray-breasted martin , snowy-bellied martin , and southern martin , as a superspecies .
12 [4]subspeciesp .
13  s .
14  subis , is the nominate form , with the typical features of the species , breeds in eastern and mid-western north america .
15 p .
16  s .
17  hesperia of the mexico and the southwestern united states , is distinguished primarily by its nesting habits .
18 p .
19  s .
20  arboricola of western mountains is large with females paler on underparts .
21 distribution and habitatfledglings in oklahoma , united statespurple martins' breeding range is throughout temperate north america .
22  their breeding habitat is open areas across eastern north america , and also some locations on the west coast from british columbia to mexico .
23 [5] martins make their nests in cavities , either natural or artificial .
24  in many places , humans put up real or artificial hollow gourds , or houses for martins , especially in the east , where purple martins are almost entirely dependent on such structures .
25  as a result , this subspecies typically breeds in colonies located in proximity to people , even within cities and towns .
26  this makes their distribution patchy , as they are usually absent from areas where no nest sites are provided .
27  western birds often make use of natural cavities such as old woodpecker holes in trees or saguaro cacti .
28 [2][4]the purple martin migrates to the amazon basin in winter .
29  its winter range extends into ecuador[6] but does not seem to ascend far up the andean foothills .
30 the first record of this species in europe was a single bird on lewis , scotland , on 56 september 2004, and the second was on the azores on 6 september 2004.conservation statuspurple martins suffered a severe population crash in the 20th century widely linked to the release and spread of european starlings in north america .
31  starlings and house sparrows compete with martins for nest cavities .
32  where purple martins once gathered by the thousands , by the 1980s they had all but disappeared .
33  [7]relationship with humansthe population of eastern purple martins (nominate form p .
34  s .
35  subis) is dependent on artificial martin houses of wood or aluminum and fake plastic gourds , supplied by individuals and organizations fond of the bird .
36  this tradition was in place even before the population crash; native americans are said to have hollowed out gourds and erected them for this purpose .
37  the situation requires ongoing maintenance , as european starlings and house sparrows compete with martins as cavity-nesters , and will fight with martins over nest sites .
38  starlings have even been known to kill purple martins , especially nestling young , and house sparrows have been known to evict purple martins from their nests .
39  thus , unmonitored purple martin houses are often overtaken by more aggressive , non-native species .
40 [2] purple martin proponents are motivated by the concern that the purple martin would likely vanish from eastern north america were it not for this assistance .
41 [8]behaviormigrationwintering in south america , purple martins migrate to north america in spring to breed .
42  spring migration is somewhat staggered , with arrivals in southern areas such as florida and texas in january , but showing up in the northern united states in april and in canada as late as may .
43  males usually arrive at a site before females .
44 [2]fall migration is also staggered , as birds head south when the breeding season is over .
45  some birds leave as early as july and others stay as late as october .
46  martins generally migrate over land , through mexico and central america .
47  when not breeding , martins form large flocks and roost together in great numbers .
48  this behavior begins just prior to the southern migration and continues on the wintering grounds .
49 [2]breedingmales arrive in breeding sites before females , and establish their territory .
50  a territory can consist of several potential nest sites .
51  after forming a pair , both the male and female inspect available nest sites .
52  this process is complicated by the fact that artificial nest sites could be houses with many rooms , clustered gourds , or single gourds .
53  the nest is made inside the cavity of such artificial structures and retains a somewhat flat appearance .
54  the nest is a structure of primarily three levels: the first level acts as a foundation and is usually made up of twigs , mud , small pebbles and in at least a few reported cases , small river mollusk shells were used; the second level of the nest is made up of grasses , finer smaller twigs; the third level of construction composing the nest , is a small compression usually lined with fresh green leaves where the eggs are laid .
55  three to six eggs are laid , and the female is the main incubator , with some help from the male .
56  purple martins are generally known to raise only a single brood .
57  fledging , when the young leave the nest , occurs at about one month , after which the parents continue to feed the fledgling young .
58 [2]purple martins are aerial insectivores , meaning that they catch insects from the air .
59  the birds are agile hunters and eat a variety of winged insects .
60  rarely , they will come to the ground to eat insects .
61  they usually fly relatively high , so , contrary to popular opinion , mosquitoes do not form a large part of their diet .
62  [2] recent research , however , does indicate that the purple martin feeds on invasive fire ants (solenopsis invicta) and that they may make up a significant portion of their diet .
63 [9]vocalizationpurple martins are fairly noisy , chirping and making sounds that have been described as chortles , rattles , and croaks .
64 [4] the various calls are said to be "throaty and rich" and can be rendered as tchew-wew , pew pew , choo , cher , zweet and zwrack .
65  the males have a gurgling and guttural courtship song , a dawn song , and even a subsong used at the end of the breeding season .
66 [4][10] tapes of purple martin song are sold to attract martins to newly established birdhouses .
67 putting up a purple martin house is like installing a miniature neighborhood in your backyard .
68  in the east , dark , glossy-blue males and brown females will peer from the entrances and chirp from the rooftops all summer .
69  in the west , martins mainly still nest the old-fashioned wayin woodpecker holes .
70  our largest swallows , purple martins perform aerial acrobatics to snap up flying insects .
71  at the end of the breeding season they gather in big flocks and make their way to south america .
72 size & shapepurple martins are very large , broad-chested swallows .
73  they have stout , slightly hooked bills , short , forked tails , and long , tapered wings .
74 color patternadult males are iridescent , dark blue-purple overall with brown-black wings and tail .
75  females and immatures are duller , with variable amounts of gray on the head and chest and a whitish lower belly .
76 behaviorpurple martins fly rapidly with a mix of flapping and gliding .
77  they feed in midair , catching large , aerial insects such as dragonflies .
78  martins feed and roost in flocks , often mixed with other species of swallows .
79  they often feed higher in the air than other swallows , which can make them tough to spot .
80 habitatpurple martins are colonial , with dozens of martins nesting in the same spot; they feed in open areas , especially near water .
81  in the east they nest almost exclusively in nest boxes and martin houses; in the west youll find them nesting in natural cavities .
