0 the yellow-headed blackbird (xanthocephalus xanthocephalus) is a medium-sized blackbird , and the only member of the genus xanthocephalus .
1 adults have a pointed bill .
2  the adult male is mainly black with a yellow head and breast; they have a white wing patch sometimes only visible in flight .
3  the adult female is mainly brown with a dull yellow throat and breast .
4  both genders resemble the respective genders of the smaller yellow-hooded blackbird of south america .
5 femalejuvenilethe breeding habitat of the yellow-headed blackbird is cattail (typha species) marshes in north america , mainly west of the great lakes .
6  the nest is built with and attached to marsh vegetation .
7  they nest in colonies , often sharing their habitat closely with the red-winged blackbird (agelaius phoeniceus) .
8  during the breeding and nesting season the males are very territorial and spend much of their time perched on reed stalks and displaying or chasing off intruders .
9 these birds migrate in the winter to the southwestern united states and mexico .
10  they often migrate in huge flocks with other species of birds .
11  the only regions of the united states where these blackbirds are permanent residents are the san joaquin valley and the lower colorado river valley of arizona and california .
12  it is an extremely rare vagrant to western europe , with some records suspected to refer to escapes from captivity .
13 these birds forage in the marsh , in fields or on the ground; they sometimes catch insects in flight .
14  they mainly eat seeds and insects .
15  outside of the nesting period , they often feed in flocks , often with related species .
16 this bird's song resembles the grating of a rusty hinge .
17 conservation statusundoubtedly has declined in some areas with draining of marshes; however , still widespread and very common .
18 familyblackbirds and orioleshabitatfresh marshes .
19  forages in fields , open country .
20  breeds in freshwater sloughs , marshy lake borders , tall cattails growing in water up to 3-4' deep .
21  forages around marshes and also commonly in open pastures , plowed fields , cattle pens , feedlots .
22 the male yellow-headed blackbird is impressive to see , but not to hear: it may have the worst song of any north american bird , a hoarse , harsh scraping .
23  yellow-heads nest in noisy colonies in big cattail marshes of the west and midwest; when not nesting , they gather in flocks in open fields , often with other blackbirds .
24  at some favored points in the southwest in winter , they may be seen in flocks of thousands .
25 photo galleryfeeding behaviorforages mostly by walking on the ground in open fields or near the water's edge; also forages low in marsh vegetation .
26  sometimes catches insects in flight .
27  may follow farm machinery in fields to feed on insects and grubs turned up by the plow .
28  except in nesting season , usually forages in flocks , often associated with other blackbirds.4, sometimes 3-5. pale gray to pale green , blotched and dotted with brown or gray .
29  incubation is by female only , 11-13 days .
30  young: both parents feed nestlings .
31  young leave nest after about 9-12 days , but remain among dense marsh plants until they are ready to fly , about 3 weeks after hatching .
32  1 brood per year , possibly 2.youngboth parents feed nestlings .
33  young leave nest after about 9-12 days , but remain among dense marsh plants until they are ready to fly , about 3 weeks after hatching .
34  1 brood per year , possibly 2.mostly insects and seeds .
35  feeds heavily on insects in summer , especially beetles , caterpillars , and grasshoppers , also ants , wasps , and others , plus a few spiders and snails .
36  young are fed mostly insects .
37  probably two-thirds of diet consists of seeds , including grass and weed seeds plus waste grain .
38 nestingtypically nests in colonies in marshes , each male selecting territory within colony and defending it against rivals by singing .
39  one male may have as many as 5 mates .
40  nest: placed in marsh , firmly lashed to standing vegetation (cattails , bulrushes , reeds) growing in water , usually no more than 3' above water's surface .
41  nest (built by female) is a bulky , deep cup woven of aquatic plants , lined with dry grass or with fine , dry marsh plants .
