0 cassin's finch (haemorhous cassinii) is a bird in the finch family fringillidae .
1  this species and the other "american rosefinches" are placed in the genus haemorhous by the american ornithologists' union but have usually been included in carpodacus .
2 adults have a short forked brown tail and brown wings .
3  they have a longer bill than the purple finch .
4  adult males are raspberry red on the head , breast , back and rump; their back and undertail are streaked .
5  adult females have light brown upperparts and light underparts with brown streaks throughout; their facial markings are less distinct than those of the female purple finch .
6 their breeding habitat is coniferous forest in mountains of western north america as far south as northern new mexico and arizona; also southern california near baja california .
7  they nest in large conifers .
8  they move to lower elevations in winter .
9 birds from canada migrate south; other birds are permanent residents; non-breeding resident birds winter as far south as central interior mexico , the mexican plateau .
10  besides the 'breeding-residency' locale of southwest canada , two disjunct breeding areas occur: the coastal mountains of extreme northern california and the black hills of south dakota .
11 these birds forage in trees , sometimes in ground vegetation .
12  they mainly eat seeds , buds and berries , some insects .
13  when not nesting , they often feed in small flocks .
14 this bird was named after john cassin , who was a curator at the philadelphia academy of natural sciences .
15 conservation statuscommon and widespread , but surveys suggest declining populations in recent decades .
16 familyfincheshabitatconifers in high mountains; lower levels in winter .
17  breeds mostly in mountain forests of conifers , especially spruce and fir , also in pine and douglas-fir in some areas and sometimes in pinyon-juniper woods .
18  often at very high elevations , near treeline in mountains .
19  winters in mountain forests of conifers , sometimes in open woods of lower valleys .
20 like a slightly larger , longer-billed version of the purple finch , cassin's finch is a resident of mountains and conifer forests of the west .
21  it is sometimes found at very high elevations , in the scrubby forest just below treeline , especially in late summer .
22  at other times , little roving flocks wander through the woods , often feeding on buds and seeds high in the trees .
23  the complicated song of the male often includes brief imitations of other birds .
24 photo galleryfeeding behaviordoes much foraging up in trees , especially when ground is snow-covered; also feeds in weedy growth and on ground .
25  except when nesting , often forages in small flocks.4-5, sometimes 3-6. bluish green , with brown and black spots often concentrated at larger end .
26  incubation is by female only , about 12-14 days .
27  male often feeds female during incubation .
28  young: both parents feed nestlings .
29  young leave nest about 2 weeks after hatching , and parents and young may promptly leave nesting area .
30 youngboth parents feed nestlings .
31  young leave nest about 2 weeks after hatching , and parents and young may promptly leave nesting area .
32 mostly seeds , buds , berries .
33  feeds mainly on vegetable material .
34  buds of various trees often staple items in diet , also eats seeds of many trees (especially conifers) and some weed seeds .
35  feeds on berries and small fruits when available .
36  also eats some insects , perhaps mainly in summer .
37 nestingnumbers breeding in an area often change from one year to the next , possibly in response to food supplies .
38  may nest in small colonies .
39  male often does not defend much of a nesting territory , instead simply staying close to female and driving away rival males .
40  nest: usually placed in large conifer , commonly about 30-40' above ground , may be as low as 10' or as high as 80' up; sometimes in aspen or other deciduous tree .
41  nest (probably built by female) is open cup made of twigs , weeds , rootlets , strips of bark , lined with fine grass , plant fibers , animal hair , sometimes decorated with lichens .
