0 the brewer's blackbird (euphagus cyanocephalus) is a medium-sized new world blackbird .
1  it is named after the ornithologist thomas mayo brewer .
2 descriptionadult males have black plumage with an iridescent purple head and neck and glossy bluish-green highlights on the rest of the body .
3  the feet and legs are black and the eye is bright yellow .
4  the female is brownish-grey with slight hints of the male's iridescence .
5  the female's eye is dark brown .
6  overall , they resemble the eastern member of the same genus , the rusty blackbird; however , the brewer's blackbird has a shorter bill and the male's head is iridescent purple .
7 [2] this bird is often mistaken for the common grackle but has a shorter tail .
8  the call is a sharp check which is also distinguishable .
9  this bird is in a different family from the eurasian blackbird .
10 habitattheir breeding habitat is open and semi-open areas , often near water , across central and western north america .
11  the cup nest can be located in various locations: in a tree , in tall grass or on a cliff .
12  they often nest in colonies .
13 these birds are often permanent residents in the west .
14  other birds migrate to the southeastern united states and mexico .
15  the range of this bird has been expanding east in the great lakes region .
16 [5]feedingthey forage in shallow water or in fields , mainly eating seeds and insects , some berries .
17  they sometimes catch insects in flight .
18  they feed in flocks outside of the breeding season , sometimes with other blackbirds .
19 protected statusthe brewer's blackbird (euphagus cyanocephalus) is protected under the migratory bird treaty act of 1918.[6]conservation statuswidespread and abundant .
20  expanded its range eastward in great lakes region during 20th century .
21  in some areas , may be affected by competition with common grackle , increasing in the west .
22 familyblackbirds and orioleshabitatfields , prairies , farms , parks .
23  occurs in many kinds of open and semi-open country , including shrubby areas near water , streamside woods , aspen groves in mountain meadows , shores , farmland , irrigated or plowed fields .
24  often around human habitations , foraging on suburban lawns and in city parking lots .
25 this is the common blackbird of open country in the west , often seen walking on the ground with short forward jerks of its head .
26  it adapts well to habitats altered by humans , and in places it may walk about on suburban sidewalks or scavenge for crumbs around beachfront restaurants .
27  in winter , brewer's blackbirds gather in large flocks , often with other blackbirds , and may be seen foraging in farmland all across the western and southern states .
28 photo galleryfeeding behaviorwalks on the ground as it searches for food .
29  sometimes wades in very shallow water .
30  sometimes catches insects in flight .
31  may follow farm machinery in fields to feed on insects turned up by the plow .
32  except in nesting season , usually forages in flocks.4-6, sometimes 3-7. pale gray to greenish gray , spotted with brown .
33  incubation is by female , 12-14 days .
34  young: both parents feed nestlings .
35  young leave the nest about 13-14 days after hatching .
36  1 brood per year , sometimes 2.youngboth parents feed nestlings .
37  young leave the nest about 13-14 days after hatching .
38  1 brood per year , sometimes 2.mostly insects and seeds , some berries .
39  feeds on a wide variety of insects , including grasshoppers , crickets , beetles , aphids , caterpillars , termites; also some spiders , snails , tiny crustaceans .
40  eats many seeds of grasses and weeds , plus much waste grain .
41  also eats berries , especially in summer .
42 nestingoften nests in loose colonies of up to 20-30 pairs .
43  in courtship display (or sometimes in aggressive display), male points bill straight up or forward , fluffs out body feathers , and partly spreads wings and tail .
44  nest site is quite variable; usually in tree 20-40' above ground , but may be on ground among tall grass , in bushes , or in crevice in cliff .
45  nest (built by female) is a rather bulky open cup made of twigs , grass , weeds , and pine needles , lined with fine grass , rootlets , animal hair .
46  often has mud or dried manure added to base .
