0 first brought to north america by shakespeare enthusiasts in the nineteenth century , european starlings are now among the continents most numerous songbirds .
1  they are stocky black birds with short tails , triangular wings , and long , pointed bills .
2  though theyre sometimes resented for their abundance and aggressiveness , theyre still dazzling birds when you get a good look .
3  covered in white spots during winter , they turn dark and glossy in summer .
4  for much of the year , they wheel through the sky and mob lawns in big , noisy flocks .
5 size & shapestarlings are chunky and blackbird-sized , but with short tails and long , slender beaks .
6  in flight their wings are short and pointed , making them look rather like small , four-pointed stars (and giving them their name) .
7 color patternat a distance , starlings look black .
8  in summer they are purplish-green iridescent with yellow beaks; in fresh winter plumage they are brown , covered in brilliant white spots .
9 behaviorstarlings are boisterous , loud , and they travel in large groups (often with blackbirds and grackles) .
10  they race across fields , beak down and probing the grass for food; or they sit high on wires or trees making a constant stream of rattles , whirrs , and whistles .
11 habitatstarlings are common in towns , suburbs , and countryside near human settlements .
12  they feed on the ground on lawns , fields , sidewalks , and parking lots .
13  they perch and roost high on wires , trees , and buildings .
14 conservation statusundoubtedly has had a negative impact on some native hole-nesting birds , such as bluebirds and red-headed woodpeckers , competing with them for nesting sites .
15 familystarlings and mynashabitatcities , parks , farms , open groves , fields .
16  most numerous in farm country and in suburbs and cities , but inhabits almost any kind of disturbed habitat .
17  usually scarce or absent in extensive wild areas of forest , scrub , or desert , but will breed around buildings or settlements in the midst of such habitats .
18 often regarded as a pest , the starling wins our grudging admiration for its adaptability , toughness , and seeming intelligence .
19  brought to north america in 1890, it has spread to occupy most of the continent , and is now abundant in many areas .
20  sociable at most seasons , starlings may gather in immense flocks in fall and winter .
21  when the flocks break up for the breeding season , males reveal a skill for mimicry , interrupting their wheezing and sputtering songs with perfect imitations of other birds .
22 photo galleryfeeding behaviorforages mostly on the ground in open areas , often probing in soil with bill .
23  sometimes feeds on fruit up in trees , and sometimes catches flying insects in the air .
24  usually forages in flocks.4-6, rarely 7. greenish white to bluish white , unmarked .
25  incubation is by both parents (female does more), about 12 days .
26  starlings sometimes lay eggs in each other's nests .
27  young: both parents feed nestlings .
28  young leave nest about 21 days after hatching .
29  2 broods per year .
30 youngboth parents feed nestlings .
31  young leave nest about 21 days after hatching .
32  2 broods per year .
33 mostly insects , berries , and seeds .
34  diet is quite varied .
35  eats mostly insects when available , especially beetles , grasshoppers , flies , and caterpillars , also spiders , snails , earthworms , and other invertebrates .
36  especially in fall and winter , eats a wide variety of berries , fruits , and seeds .
37  sometimes visits flowers for nectar .
38  will come to bird feeders for a variety of items .
39 nestingmale establishes territory and chooses nest site , singing to attract a mate .
40  when a female arrives , male perches next to nest site and sings , often waving his wings .
41  male sometimes has more than one mate .
42  nest site is in any kind of cavity; usually in natural hollow or woodpecker hole in tree , in birdhouse , or (in southwest) in hole in giant cactus .
43  sometimes in holes or crevices in buildings or other odd spots .
44  nest construction begun by male , often completed by female (who may throw out some of male's nest material) .
45  nest is a loose mass of twigs , weeds , grass , leaves , trash , feathers , with slight depression for eggs .
