0 the phainopepla or northern phainopepla[2] (phainopepla nitens) is the most northerly representative of the mainly tropical central american family ptiliogonatidae , the silky flycatchers .
1  its name is from the greek phain pepla meaning "shining robe" in reference to the male's plumage .
2 descriptionfemale in california , usamale in flight showing white wing patchesthe phainopepla is a striking bird , 1620 cm (6.37.9 in) long with a noticeable crest and a long tail; it is slender , and has an upright posture when it perches .
3  its bill is short and slender .
4  the male is glossy black , and has a white wing patch that is visible when it flies; the female is plain gray and has a lighter gray wing patch .
5  both sexes have red eyes , but these are more noticeable in the female than the male .
6 range and habitatthe phainopepla ranges as far north as central california with the san joaquin valley and southern utah , and south to central mexico , the interior mexican plateau region; the southern edge of the plateau , the transverse mountains is its non-breeding home .
7  it is found in hot areas , including desert oases , and is readily seen in the deserts of arizona , southern nevada , and southern california; also the baja peninsula , both baja california-(north), and baja california sur where they are only breeding resident birds .
8  extreme individuals have travelled as far as canada , with one bird in 2009 reaching as far north as brampton , ontario , canada .
9 [3]berries , any small insects , fruits , vegetables .
10  phainopepla have a specialized mechanism in their gizzard that shucks berry skins off the fruit and packs the skins separately from the rest of the fruit into the intestines for more efficient digestion .
11  so far this is the only known bird able to do this .
12  they appear to relish the fruit of phoradendron californicum , the desert mistletoe .
13 reproductionit nests in the spring .
14  the eggs are gray or pink and speckled , and the incubation , done by both the male and female , takes fifteen days .
15  the young will be reared by the parents for up to nineteen more days .
16 [4]phainopeplas have been found to imitate the calls of twelve other species , such as the red-tailed hawk (buteo jamaicensis) and the northern flicker (colaptes auratus) .
17 [5]a crested songbird of the deserts and arid woodlands of the southwestern united states and mexico , the phainopepla is unique in taxonomy , distribution , and behavior .
18  it is particularly notable for its enigmatic pattern of breeding twice each year , in two different habitats .
19 adult descriptionmedium-sized songbird .
20 tall , wispy crest .
21 slender , with long tail .
22 male shiny black .
23 female all gray .
24 immature descriptionimmature resembles adult female , but more brownish , and with brown eyes .
