0 the red crossbill (loxia curvirostra) is a small passerine bird in the finch family fringillidae , also known as the common crossbill in eurasia .
1  crossbills have distinctive mandibles , crossed at the tips , which enable them to extract seeds from conifer cones and other fruits .
2 adults are often brightly coloured , with red or orange males and green or yellow females , but there is wide variation in colour , beak size and shape , and call types , leading to different classifications of variants , some of which have been named as subspecies .
3 descriptioncrossbills are characterized by the mandibles crossing at their tips , which gives the group its english name .
4  using their crossed mandibles for leverage , crossbills are able to efficiently separate the scales of conifer cones and extract the seeds on which they feed .
5  adult males tend to be red or orange in colour , and females green or yellow , but there is much variation .
6 in north america , nine distinct red crossbill variants (referred to as call types) differing in vocalizations as well as beak size and shape are recognized .
7 [2] each call type evolved to specialize on different species of conifer .
8 [3]breeding and irruptionthe red crossbill breeds in the spruce forests of north america , as well as europe and asia .
9  some populations breed in pine forests in certain areas of all three continents , and in north america , also in douglas-fir .
10  it nests in conifers , laying 35 eggs .
11 this crossbill is mainly resident , but often irrupts south when its food source fails .
12  this species forms flocks outside the breeding season , often mixed with other crossbills .
13  the first known irruption , recorded in england by the chronicler matthew paris , was in 1254; the next , also in england , appears to have been in 1593 (by which time the earlier irruption had been entirely forgotten , since the crossbills were described as "unknown" in england) .
14 [4] the engraver thomas bewick wrote that "it sometimes is met with in great numbers in this country , but its visits are not regular",[5] adding that many hundreds arrived in 1821. bewick then cites matthew paris as writing "in 1254, in the fruit season , certain wonderful birds , which had never before been seen in england , appeared , chiefly in the orchards .
15  they were a little bigger than larks , and eat the pippins of the apples [pomorum grana] but no other part of them .
16  .
17  .
18  they had the parts of the beak crossed [cancellatas] by which they divided the apples as with a forceps or knife .
19  the parts of the apples which they left were as if they had been infected with poison .
20 "[5] bewick further records an account by sir roger twysden for the additions to the additamenta of matt .
21  paris "that in the apple season of 1593, an immense multitude of unknown birds came into england  .
22  .
23  .
24  swallowing nothing but the pippins , [granella ipsa sive acinos] and for the purpose of dividing the apple , their beaks were admirably adapted by nature , for they turn back , and strike one point upon the other , so as to show  .
25  .
26  .
27  the transverse sickles , one turned past the other .
28 "[5]taxonomy and systematicsthis species is difficult to separate from parrot crossbill and scottish crossbill , both of which breed within its eurasian range , as plumage distinctions from those two species are negligible , though the head and bill are smaller than in either of the other species .
29  care is needed in identification , especially in eurasia , where the glip or chup call is probably the best indicator .
30  the identification problem is less severe in north america , where only red crossbill and white-winged crossbill occur .
31  however , there has been debate as to whether different call types should be considered separate species .
32  for example , the south hills crossbill , occurring in the south hills and albion mountains in idaho has been described as a new species (loxia sinesciuris) because it shows a very low degree of hybridization with the red crossbill .
33 [6] there are also genetic differences between the call type populations .
34 [7] nevertheless , few ornithologists have chosen to give these forms species status .
35 some large-billed , pine-feeding populations currently assigned to this species in the mediterranean area may possibly be better referred to either parrot crossbill or to new species in their own right , but more research is needed .
36  these include balearic crossbill l .
37  curvirostra balearica and north african crossbill l .
38  curvirostra poliogyna , feeding primarily on aleppo pine (pinus halepensis); cyprus crossbill l .
39  curvirostra guillemardi , feeding primarily on european black pine (pinus nigra); and an as-yet unidentified crossbill with a parrot crossbill-size bill feeding primarily on bosnian pine (pinus heldreichii) in the balkans .
40  these populations also differ on plumage , with the balearic , north african and cyprus races having yellower males , and the balkan type having deep purple-pink males; this however merely reflects the differing anthocyanin content of the cones they feed on , as these pigments are transferred to the feathers .
