0 the common tern (sterna hirundo) is a seabird of the tern family sternidae .
1  this bird has a circumpolar distribution , its four subspecies breeding in temperate and subarctic regions of europe , asia and north america .
2  it is strongly migratory , wintering in coastal tropical and subtropical regions .
3  breeding adults have light grey upperparts , white to very light grey underparts , a black cap , orange-red legs , and a narrow pointed bill .
4  depending on the subspecies , the bill may be mostly red with a black tip or all black .
5  there are a number of similar species , including the partly sympatric arctic tern , which can be separated on plumage details , leg and bill colour , or vocalisations .
6 breeding in a wider range of habitats than any of its relatives , the common tern nests on any flat , poorly vegetated surface close to water , including beaches and islands , and it readily adapts to artificial substrates such as floating rafts .
7  the nest may be a bare scrape in sand or gravel , but it is often lined or edged with whatever debris is available .
8  up to three eggs may be laid , their dull colours and blotchy patterns providing camouflage on the open beach .
9  incubation is by both sexes , and the eggs hatch in around 2122 days , longer if the colony is disturbed by predators .
10  the downy chicks fledge in 2228 days .
11  like most terns , this species feeds by plunge-diving for fish , either in the sea or in freshwater , but molluscs , crustaceans and other invertebrate prey may form a significant part of the diet in some areas .
12 eggs and young are vulnerable to predation by mammals such as rats and american mink , and large birds including gulls , owls and herons .
13  common terns may be infected by lice , parasitic worms , and mites , although blood parasites appear to be rare .
14  its large population and huge breeding range mean that this species is classed as being of least concern , although numbers in north america have declined sharply in recent decades .
15  despite international legislation protecting the common tern , in some areas populations are threatened by habitat loss , pollution or the disturbance of breeding colonies .
16 == taxonomy ==the terns , family sternidae , are small to medium-sized seabirds closely related to the gulls , skimmers and skuas .
17  they are gull-like in appearance , but typically have a lighter build , long pointed wings (which give them a fast , buoyant flight), a deeply forked tail , slender legs , and webbed feet .
18  most species are grey above and white below , and have a black cap which is reduced or flecked with white in the non-breeding season .
19 the common tern's closest relatives appear to be the antarctic tern , followed by the eurasian arctic and roseate terns .
20  genetic evidence suggests that the common tern may have diverged from an ancestral stock earlier than its relatives .
21  no fossils are known from north america , and those claimed in europe are of uncertain age and species .
22 the common tern was first described by linnaeus in his systema naturae in 1758 under its current scientific name , sterna hirundo .
23  the word "stearn" was used in old english and a similar word was used by the frisians for tern .
24  "stearn" appears in the poem the seafarer , written around 1000 ad .
25  linnaeus adopted this word for the genus name sterna .
26  the latin for swallow is "hirundo" and refers here to the tern's superficial likeness to that unrelated bird , which has a similar light build and long forked tail .
27  this resemblance also leads to the informal name "sea swallow", recorded from at least the seventeenth century .
28  the scots names picktarnie , tarrock and their many variants are also believed to be onomatopoeic , derived from the distinctive call .
29  due to the difficulty in distinguishing the two species , all the informal common names are shared with the arctic tern .
30 four subspecies of the common tern are generally recognized , although s .
31  h .
32  minussensis is sometimes considered to be an intergrade between s .
33  h .
34  hirundo and s .
35  h .
36  longipennis .
37 == description ==the nominate subspecies of the common tern is {convert|31|-|35|cm|abbr = on} long , including a {convert|6|-|9|cm|abbr = on} fork in the tail , with a {convert|77|-|98|cm|abbr = on} wingspan .
38  it weighs {convert|110|-|141|g|abbr = on} .
39  breeding adults have pale grey upperparts , very pale grey underparts , a black cap , orange-red legs , and a narrow pointed bill that can be mostly red with a black tip , or all black , depending on the subspecies .
40  the common tern's upperwings are pale grey , but as the summer wears on , the dark feather shafts of the outer flight feathers become exposed , and a grey wedge appears on the wings .
41  the rump and tail are white , and on a standing bird the long tail extends no further than the folded wingtips , unlike the arctic and roseate terns in which the tail protrudes beyond the wings .
42  there are no significant differences between the sexes .
43  in non-breeding adults the forehead and underparts become white , the bill is all black or black with a red base , and the legs are dark red or black .
44  the upperwings have an obvious dark area at the front edge of the wing , the carpal bar .
45  terns that have not bred successfully may start moulting into non-breeding adult plumage from june , but late july is more typical , with the moult suspended during migration .
46  there is also some geographical variation , californian birds often being in non-breeding plumage during migration .
47 juvenile common terns have pale grey upperwings with a dark carpal bar .
48  the crown and nape are brown , and the forehead is ginger , wearing to white by autumn .
49  the upperparts are ginger with brown and white scaling , and the tail lacks the adult's long outer feathers .
50  birds in their first post-juvenile plumage , which normally remain in their wintering areas , resemble the non-breeding adult , but have a duskier crown , dark carpal bar , and often very worn plumage .
51  by their second year , most young terns are either indistinguishable from adults , or show only minor differences such as a darker bill or white forehead .
52 the common tern is an agile flyer , capable of rapid turns and swoops , hovering , and vertical take-off .
53  when commuting with fish , it flies close to the surface in a strong head wind , but {convert|10|-|30|m|abbr = on} above the water in a following wind .
54  unless migrating , normally it stays below {convert|100|m|abbr = on}, and averages {convert|30|kph|abbr = on} in the absence of a tail wind .
55  its average flight speed during the nocturnal migration flight is {convert|43|-|54|kph|abbr = on} at a height of {convert|1000|-|3000|m|abbr = on} .
56 ===moult===the juvenile starts moulting into adult plumage in its first october; the head , tail and body plumage is replaced first , mostly by february , then the wing feathers .
57  the primaries are replaced in stages; the innermost feathers moult first , then replacement is suspended during the southern winter (birds of this age staying in their wintering areas) and recommences in the autumn .
58  in may to june of the second year a similar moult sequence starts , with a pause during primary moult for birds that return north , but not for those that stay in the winter quarters .
59  a major moult to adult breeding plumage occurs in the next february to june , between 4090% of feathers being replaced .
60  old primary feathers wear away to reveal the blackish barbs beneath .
61  the moult pattern means that the oldest feathers are those nearest the middle of the wing , so as the northern summer progresses , a dark wedge appears on the wing due to this feather ageing process .
62 terns are unusual in the frequency in which they moult their primaries , which are replaced at least twice , occasionally three times in a year .
63  the visible difference in feather age is accentuated in the greater ultraviolet reflectance of new primaries , and the freshness of the wing feathers is used by females in mate selection .
64  experienced females tend to accept mates which best show their fitness through the quality of their wing feathers .
65  rarely , a very early moult at the nesting colony may be linked to breeding failure , both the onset of moult and reproductive behaviour being linked to falling levels of the hormone prolactin .
66 === similar species ===there are several terns of a similar size and general appearance to the common tern .
67  a traditionally difficult species to separate is the arctic tern , and until the key characteristics were clarified , distant or flying birds of the two species were often jointly recorded as "commic terns" .
68  although similar in size , the two terns differ in structure and flight .
69  the common tern has a larger head , thicker neck , longer legs , and more triangular and stiffer wings than its relative , and has a more powerful , direct flight .
70  the arctic tern has greyer underparts than the common , which make its white cheeks more obvious , whereas the rump of the common tern can be greyish in non-breeding plumage , compared to the white of its relative .
71  the common tern develops a dark wedge on the wings as the breeding season progresses , but the wings of arctic stay white throughout the northern summer .
72  all the flight feathers of the arctic tern are translucent against a bright sky , only the four innermost wing feathers of the common tern share this property .
73  the trailing edge of the outer flight feathers is a thin black line in the arctic tern , but thicker and less defined in the common .
74  the bill of an adult common tern is orange-red with a black tip , except in black-billed s .
75  h .
76  longipennis , and its legs are bright red , while both features are a darker red colour in the arctic tern , which also lacks the black bill tip .
77 in the breeding areas , the roseate tern can be distinguished by its pale plumage , long , mainly black bill and very long tail feathers .
78  the non-breeding plumage of roseate is pale above and white , sometimes pink-tinged , below .
79  it retains the long tail streamers , and has a black bill .
80  in flight , the roseate's heavier head and neck , long bill and faster , stiffer wingbeats are also characteristic .
81  it feeds further out to sea than the common tern .
82  in north america , the forster's tern in breeding plumage is obviously larger than the common , with relatively short wings , a heavy head and thick bill , and long , strong legs; in all non-breeding plumages , its white head and dark eye patch make the american species unmistakable .
83 in the wintering regions , there are also confusion species , including the antarctic tern of the southern oceans , the south american tern , the australasian white-fronted tern and the white-cheeked tern of the indian ocean .
84  identification may be aided by the plumage differences due to "opposite" breeding seasons .
85  the antarctic tern is more sturdy than the common , with a heavier bill .
86  in breeding condition , its dusky underparts and full black cap outline a white cheek stripe .
87  in non-breeding plumages , it lacks , or has only an indistinct , carpal bar , and young birds show dark bars on the tertials , obvious on the closed wing and in flight .
88  the south american tern is larger than the common , with a larger , more curved red bill , and has a smoother , more extensive black cap in non-breeding plumage .
89  like antarctic , it lacks a strong carpal bar in non-breeding plumages , and it also shares the distinctive barring of the tertials in young birds .
90  the white-fronted tern has a white forehead in breeding plumage , a heavier bill , and in non-breeding plumage is paler below than the common , with white underwings .
91  the white-cheeked tern is smaller , has uniform grey upperparts , and in breeding pumage is darker above with whiter cheeks .
92 juvenile common terns are easily separated from similar-aged birds of related species .
93  they show extensive ginger colouration to the back , and have a pale base to the bill .
94  young arctic terns have a grey back and black bill , and juvenile roseate terns have a distinctive scalloped "saddle" .
95  hybrids between common and roseate terns have been recorded , particularly from the us , and the intermediate plumage and calls shown by these birds is a potential identification pitfall .
96  such birds may have more extensive black on the bill , but confirmation of mixed breeding may depend on the exact details of individual flight feathers .
97 === voice ===the common tern has a wide repertoire of calls , which have a lower pitch than the equivalent calls of arctic terns .
98  the most distinctive sound is the alarm kee-yah , stressed on the first syllable , in contrast to the second-syllable stress of the arctic tern .
99  the alarm call doubles up as a warning to intruders , although serious threats evoke a kyar , given as a tern takes flight , and quietens the usually noisy colony while its residents assess the danger .
100  a down-slurred keeur is given when an adult is approaching the nest while carrying a fish , and is possibly used for individual recognition (chicks emerge from hiding when they hear their parents giving this call) .
101  another common call is a kip uttered during social contact .
102  other vocalizations include a kakakakaka when attacking intruders , and a staccato kek-kek-kek from fighting males .
103 parents and chicks can locate one another by call , and siblings also recognise each other's vocalisations from about the twelfth day from hatching , which helps to keep the brood together .
104 == distribution and habitat ==most populations of the common tern are strongly migratory , wintering south of their temperate and subarctic northern hemisphere breeding ranges .
105  first summer birds usually remain in their wintering quarters , although a few return to breeding colonies some time after the arrival of the adults .
106  in north america , the common tern breeds along the atlantic coast from labrador to north carolina , and inland throughout much of canada east of the rocky mountains .
107  in the united states , some breeding populations can also be found in the states bordering the great lakes , and locally on the gulf coast .
108  there are small , only partially migratory , colonies in the caribbean; these are in the bahamas and cuba , and off venezuela in the los roques and las aves archipelagos .
109 new world birds winter along both coasts of central and south america , to argentina on the east coast and to northern chile on the west coast .
110  records from south america and the azores show that some birds may cross the atlantic in both directions on their migration .
111 the common tern breeds across most of europe , with the highest numbers in the north and east of the continent .
112  there are small populations on the north african coast , and in the azores , canary islands and madeira .
113  most winter off western or southern africa , birds from the south and west of europe tending to stay north of the equator and other european birds moving further south .
114  the breeding range continues across the temperate and taiga zones of asia , with scattered outposts on the persian gulf and the coast of iran .
115  small populations breed on islands off sri lanka , and in the ladakh region of the tibetan plateau .
116  western asian birds winter in the northern indian ocean , and s .
117  h .
118  tibetana appears to be common off east africa during the northern hemisphere winter .
119  birds from further north and east in asia , such as s .
120  h .
121  longipennis , move through japan , thailand and the western pacific as far as southern australia .
122  there are small and erratic colonies in west africa , in nigeria and guinea-bissau , unusual in that they are within what is mainly a wintering area .
123  only a few common terns have been recorded in new zealand , and this species' status in polynesia is unclear .
124  a bird ringed at the nest in sweden was found dead on stewart island , new zealand , five months later , having flown an estimated 25,000 km (15,000 mi) .
125 as long distance migrants , common terns sometimes occur well outside their normal range .
126  stray birds have been found inland in africa (zambia and malawi), and on the maldives and comoros islands; the nominate subspecies has reached australia , the andes , and the interior of south america .
127  asian s .
128  h .
129  longipennis has recent records from western europe .
130 the common tern breeds over a wider range of habitats than any of its relatives , nesting from the taiga of asia to tropical shores , and at altitudes up to {convert|2000|m|abbr = on} in armenia , and {convert|4800|m|abbr = on} in asia .
131  it avoids areas which are frequently exposed to excessive rain or wind , and also icy waters , so it does not breed as far north as the arctic tern .
132  the common tern breeds close to freshwater or the sea on almost any open flat habitat , including sand or shingle beaches , firm dune areas , salt marsh , or , most commonly , islands .
133  flat grassland or heath , or even large flat rocks may be suitable in an island environment .
134  in mixed colonies , common terns will tolerate somewhat longer ground vegetation than arctic terns , but avoid the even taller growth acceptable to roseate terns; the relevant factor here is the different leg lengths of the three species .
135  common terns adapt readily to artificial floating rafts , and may even nest on flat factory roofs .
136  unusual nest sites include hay bales , a stump {convert|0.6|m|ft|abbr = on|precision = 0} above the water , and floating logs or vegetation .
137  there is a record of a common tern taking over a spotted sandpiper nest and laying its eggs with those of the wader .
138  outside the breeding season , all that is needed in terms of habitat is access to fishing areas , and somewhere to land .
139  in addition to natural beaches and rocks , boats , buoys and piers are often used both as perches and night-time roosts .
140 == behaviour ===== territory ===the common tern breeds in colonies which do not normally exceed 2,000 pairs , but may occasionally number more than 20,000 pairs .
141  colonies inland tend to be smaller than on the coast .
142  common terns often nest alongside other coastal species , such as arctic , roseate and sandwich terns , black-headed gulls , and black skimmers .
143  especially in the early part of the breeding season , for no known reason , most or all of the terns will fly in silence low and fast out to sea .
144  this phenomenon is called a "dread" .
145 on their return to the breeding sites , the terns may loiter for a few days before settling into a territory , and the actual start of nesting may be linked to a high availability of fish .
146  terns defend only a small area , with distances between nests sometimes being as little as {convert|50|cm|abbr = on}, although {convert|150|-|350|cm|abbr = on} is more typical .
147  as with many birds , the same site is re-used year after year , with a record of one pair returning for 17 successive breeding seasons .
148  around 90% of experienced birds reuse their former territory , so young birds must nest on the periphery , find a bereaved mate , or move to another colony .
149  a male selects a nesting territory a few days after his arrival in the spring , and is joined by his previous partner unless she is more than five days late , in which case the pair may separate .
150 the defence of the territory is mainly by the male , who repels intruders of either sex .
151  he gives an alarm call , opens his wings , raises his tail and bows his head to show the black cap .
152  if the intruder persists , the male stops calling and fights by bill grappling until the intruder submits by raising its head to expose the throat .
153  aerial trespassers are simply attacked , sometimes following a joint upward spiralling flight .
154  despite the aggression shown to adults , wandering chicks are usually tolerated , whereas in a gull colony they would be attacked and killed .
155  the nest is defended until the chicks have fledged , and all the adults in the colony will collectively repel potential predators .
156 === breeding ===pairs are established or confirmed through aerial courtship displays in which a male and a female fly in wide circles up to {convert|200|m|abbr = on} or more , calling all the while , before the two birds descend together in zigzag glides .
157  if the male is carrying a fish , he may attract the attention of other males too .
158  on the ground , the male courts the female by circling her with his tail and neck raised , head pointing down , and wings partially open .
159  if she responds , they may both adopt a posture with the head pointed skywards .
160  the male may tease a female with the fish , not parting with his offering until she has displayed to him sufficiently .
161  once courtship is complete , the male makes a shallow depression in the sand , and the female scratches in the same place .
162  several trials may take place until the pair settle on a site for the actual nest .
163  the eggs may be laid on bare sand , gravel or soil , but a lining of debris or vegetation is often added if available , or the nest may be rimmed with seaweed , stones or shells .
164  the saucer-shaped scrape is typically {convert|4|cm|abbr = on} deep and {convert|10|cm|abbr = on} across , but may extend to as much as {convert|24|cm|abbr = on} wide including the surrounding decorative material .
165  breeding success in areas prone to flooding has been enhanced by the provision of artificial mats made from eelgrass , which encourage the terns to nest in higher , less vulnerable areas , since many prefer the mats to bare sand .
166  the common tern tends to use more nest material than roseate or arctic terns , although roseate often nests in areas with more growing vegetation .
167 terns are expert at locating their nests in a large colony .
168  studies show that terns can find and excavate their eggs when they are buried , even if the nest material is removed and the sand smoothed over .
169  they will find a nest placed {convert|5|m|abbr = on} from its original site , or even further if it is moved in several stages .
170  eggs are accepted if reshaped with plasticine or coloured yellow (but not red or blue) .
171  this ability to locate the eggs is an adaptation to life in an unstable , wind-blown and tidal environment .
172 the peak time for egg production is early may , with some birds , particularly first-time breeders , laying later in the month or in june .
173  the clutch size is normally three eggs; larger clutches probably result from two females laying in the same nest .
174  egg size averages {convert|41|x|31|mm|abbr = on}, although each successive egg in a clutch is slightly smaller than the first laid .
175  the average egg weight is {convert|20.2|g|abbr = on}, of which 5% is shell .
176  the egg weight depends on how well-fed the female is , as well as on its position in the clutch .
177  the eggs are cream , buff , or pale brown , marked with streaks , spots or blotches of black , brown or grey which help to camouflage them .
178  incubation is by both sexes , although more often by the female , and lasts 2122 days , extending to 25 days if there are frequent disturbances at the colony which cause the adults to leave the eggs unattended; nocturnal predation may lead to incubation taking up to 34 days .
179  on hot days the incubating parent may fly to water to wet its belly feathers before returning to the eggs , thus affording the eggs some cooling .
180  except when the colony suffers disaster , 90% of the eggs hatch .
181  the precocial downy chick is yellowish with black or brown markings , and like the eggs , is similar to the equivalent stage of the arctic tern .
182  the chicks fledge in 2228 days , usually 2526. fledged juveniles are fed at the nest for about five days , and then accompany the adults on fishing expeditions .
183  the young birds may receive supplementary feeds from the parents until the end of the breeding season , and beyond .
184  common terns have been recorded feeding their offspring on migration and in the wintering grounds , at least until the adults move further south in about december .
185 like many terns , this species is very defensive of its nest and young , and will harass humans , dogs , muskrats and most diurnal birds , but unlike the more aggressive arctic tern , it rarely hits the intruder , usually swerving off at the last moment .
186  adults can discriminate between individual humans , attacking familiar people more intensely than strangers .
187  nocturnal predators do not elicit similar attacks; colonies can be wiped out by rats , and adults desert the colony for up to eight hours when great horned owls are present .
188 common terns usually breed once a year .
189  second clutches are possible if the first is lost .
190  rarely , a second clutch may be laid and incubated while some chicks from the first clutch are still being fed .
191  the first breeding attempt is usually at four years of age , sometimes at three years .
192  the average number of young per pair surviving to fledging can vary from zero in the event of the colony being flooded to over 2.5 in a good year .
193  in north america , productivity was between 1.0 and 2.0 on islands , but less than 1.0 at coastal and inland sites .
194  birds become more successful at raising chicks with age .
195  this continues throughout their breeding lives , but the biggest increase is in the first five years .
196  the maximum documented lifespan in the wild is 23 years in north america and 33 years in europe , but 12 years is a more typical lifespan .
197 === food and feeding ===like all sterna terns , the common tern feeds by plunge-diving for fish , from a height of {convert|1|-|6|m|ft|abbr = on}, either in the sea or in freshwater lakes and large rivers .
198  the bird may submerge for a second or so , but to no more than {convert|50|cm|abbr = on} below the surface .
199  when seeking fish , this tern flies head-down and with its bill held vertically .
200  it may circle or hover before diving , and then plunges directly into the water , whereas the arctic tern favours a "stepped-hover" technique , and the roseate tern dives at speed from a greater height , and submerges for longer .
201  the common tern typically forages up to {convert|5|-|10|km|mi|abbr = on} away from the breeding colony , sometimes as far as {convert|15|km|abbr = on} .
202  it will follow schools of fish , and its west african migration route is affected by the location of huge shoals of sardines off the coast of ghana; it will also track groups of predatory fish or dolphins , waiting for their prey to be driven to the sea's surface .
203  terns often feed in flocks , especially if food is plentiful , and the fishing success rate in a flock is typically about one-third higher than for individuals .
204 terns have red oil droplets in the cone cells of the retinas of their eyes .
205  this improves contrast and sharpens distance vision , especially in hazy conditions .
206  birds that have to see through an air/water interface , such as terns and gulls , have more strongly coloured carotenoid pigments in the cone oil drops than other avian species .
207  the improved eyesight helps terns to locate shoals of fish , although it is uncertain whether they are sighting the phytoplankton on which the fish feed , or observing other terns diving for food .
208  tern's eyes are not particularly ultraviolet sensitive , an adaptation more suited to terrestrial feeders like the gulls .
209 the common tern preferentially hunts fish {convert|5|-|15|cm|in|abbr = on} long .
210  the species caught depend on what is available , but if there is a choice , terns feeding several chicks will take larger prey than those with smaller broods .
211  the proportion of fish fed to chicks may be as high as 95% in some areas , but invertebrate prey may form a significant part of the diet elsewhere .
212  this may include worms , leeches , molluscs such as small squid , and crustaceans (prawns , shrimp and mole crabs) .
213  in freshwater areas , large insects may be caught , such as beetles , cockchafers and moths .
214  adult insects may be caught in the air , and larvae picked from the ground or from the water surface .
215  prey is caught in the bill and either swallowed head-first , or carried back to the chicks .
216  occasionally , two or more small fish may be carried simultaneously .
217  when adults take food back to the nest , they recognise their young by call , rather than visual identification .
218 the common tern may attempt to steal fish from arctic terns , but might itself be harassed by kleptoparasitic skuas , laughing gulls , roseate terns , or by other common terns while bringing fish back to its nest .
219  in one study , two males whose mates had died spent much time stealing food from neighbouring broods .
220 terns normally drink in flight , usually taking seawater in preference to freshwater , if both are available .
221  chicks do not drink before fledging , reabsorbing water , and , like adults , excreting excess salt in a concentrated solution from a specialised nasal gland .
222  fish bones and the hard exoskeletons of crustaceans or insects are regurgitated as pellets .
223  adults fly off the nest to defecate , and even small chicks walk a short distance from the scrape to deposit their faeces .
224  adults attacking animals or humans will often defecate as they dive , often successfully fouling the intruder .
225 == predators and parasites ==rats will take tern eggs , and may even store large numbers in caches , and the american mink is an important predator of hatched chicks , both in north america , and in scotland where it has been introduced .
226  the red fox can also be a local problem .
227  because common terns nest on islands , the most common predators are normally other birds rather than mammals .
228  the ruddy turnstone will take eggs from unattended nests , and gulls may take chicks .
229  great horned owls and short-eared owls will kill both adults and chicks , and black-crowned night herons will also eat small chicks .
230  merlins and peregrine falcons may attack flying terns; as with other birds , it seems likely that one advantage of flocking behaviour is to confuse fast-flying predators .
231 the common tern hosts feather lice , which are quite different from those found in arctic terns , despite the close relationship of the two birds .
232  it may also be infected by parasitic worms , such as the widespread diphyllobothrium species , the duck parasite ligula intestinalis , and schistocephalus species carried initially by fish .
233  tapeworms of the family cyclophyllidea may also infect this species .
234  the mite reighardia sternae has been found in common terns from italy , north america and china .
235  a study of 75 breeding common terns found that none carried blood parasites .
236  colonies have been affected by avian cholera and ornithosis , and it is possible that the common tern may be threatened in the future by outbreaks of avian influenza to which it is susceptible .
237  in 1961 the common tern was the first wild bird species identified as infected with avian influenza , the h5n3 variant being found in an outbreak of south african birds .
238 == status ==the common tern is classed as least concern on the iucn red list .
239  it has a large population of 1,600,0004,600,000 mature individuals and a huge breeding range estimated at {convert|29200000|km2|abbr = on} .
240  breeding numbers have been estimated at 250,000500,000 pairs , the majority breeding in asia .
241  up to 140,000 pairs breed in europe .
242  fewer than 80,000 pairs breed in north america , with most breeding on the northeast atlantic coast and a declining population of less than 10,000 pairs breeding in the great lakes region .
243 in the nineteenth century , the use of tern feathers and wings in the millinery trade was the main cause of large reductions in common tern populations in both europe and north america , especially on the atlantic coasts and inland .
244  sometimes entire stuffed birds were used to make hats .
245  numbers largely recovered early in the twentieth century mainly due to legislation and the work of conservation organizations .
246  although some eurasian populations are stable , numbers in north america have fallen by more than 70% in the last 40 years , and there is an overall negative trend in the global estimates for this species .
247 threats come from habitat loss through building , pollution or vegetation growth , or disturbance of breeding birds by humans , vehicles , boats or dogs .
248  local natural flooding may lead to nest losses , and some colonies are vulnerable to predation by rats and large gulls .
249  gulls also compete with terns for nest sites .
250  some birds are hunted in the caribbean for commercial sale as food .
251  breeding success may be enhanced by the use of floating nest rafts , man-made islands or other artificial nest sites , and by preventing human disturbance .
252  overgrown vegetation may be burned to clear the ground , and gulls can be killed or discouraged by deliberate disturbance .
253  contamination with polychlorinated biphenyls (pcbs) resulted in enhanced levels of feminisation in male embryos , which seemed to disappear prior to fledging , with no effect on colony productivity , but dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene (dde), which results from the breakdown of ddt , led to very low levels of successful breeding in some us locations .
254 the common tern is one of the species to which the agreement on the conservation of african-eurasian migratory waterbirds (aewa) and the us-canada migratory bird treaty act of 1918 apply .
255  parties to the awea agreement are required to engage in a wide range of conservation strategies described in a detailed action plan .
256  the plan is intended to address key issues such as species and habitat conservation , management of human activities , research , education , and implementation .
257  the north american legislation is similar , although there is a greater emphasis on protection .
