0 the cackling goose (branta hutchinsii) is a north american bird of the genus branta of black geese , which contains species with largely black plumage , distinguishing them from the grey anser species .
1 ==description==the black head and neck with white "chinstrap" distinguish this goose from all except the larger canada goose (branta canadensis) and the similarly sized barnacle goose (b .
2  leucopsis) .
3  there are up to 5 subspecies of cackling goose , of varying sizes and plumage details .
4  the female looks virtually identical but is slightly lighter and has a different voice .
5  some are hard to distinguish from the canada goose , with which the cackling goose was long assumed to form one species , the cackling goose and the smaller canada goose subspecies being called the lesser canada goose .
6  the smallest {convert|1.4|kg|abbr = on} cackling geese (b .
7  h .
8  minima) are much smaller than any canada goose , but the subspecies b .
9  h .
10  hutchinsii , at up to {convert|3|kg|abbr = on}, grows to the same size as some canada geese .
11  the distinctness of the extinct population of the komandorski and kuril islands b .
12  h .
13  asiatica is controversial .
14  the barnacle goose differs in having a black breast and grey , rather than brownish , body plumage .
15 ==range==this species is native to north america .
16  it breeds in northern canada and alaska in a variety of tundra habitats .
17  however , the nest is usually located in an elevated area near water .
18  the eggs are laid in a shallow depression lined with plant material and down .
19  males can be very aggressive in defending territory .
20  a pair may mate for life (up to around 20 years) .
21  adult geese are often seen leading their goslings in a line with one parent at the front , and the other at the back of the "parade" .
22 like most geese , it is naturally migratory , the wintering range being most of the u.s.
24 , and locally in western canada and northern mexico .
25  the calls overhead from large groups of cackling geese flying in v-shaped formation signal the transitions into spring and fall .
26  in some areas , migration routes have changed due to changes in habitat and food sources .
27 cackling geese have occasionally reached western europe naturally , as has been proved by ringing recoveries .
28  the birds are of at least the subspecies hutchinsii , and possibly others .
29  cackling geese are also found naturally on occasions in the kamchatka peninsula in eastern siberia , eastern china , and throughout japan .
30 ==feeding==these birds feed mainly on plant material .
31  when feeding in water , they submerge their heads and necks to reach aquatic plants , sometimes tipping forward like a dabbling duck .
32  flocks of these birds often feed on leftover cultivated grains in fields , especially during migration or in winter .
33  they also eat some insects , molluscs and crustaceans .
34 ==status==by the early 20th century , over-hunting and loss of habitat in the late 19th and early 20th centuries had resulted in a serious decline in the numbers of this bird in its native range .
35  with improved game laws and habitat restoration and preservation programs , their populations have recovered in most of their range , although some local populations may still be declining , especially of the subspecies minima and leucopareia .
36  though the taxonomic distinctness of the komandorski and kuril islands populations , which used to winter in japan , is controversial , it is without doubt that they disappeared around 1929.==systematics==the cackling goose was originally considered to be the same species or a subspecies of the canada goose , but in july 2004 the american ornithologists' union's (aou) committee on classification and nomenclature split the two into two species , making cackling goose into a full species with the scientific name branta hutchinsii .
37  the british ornithologists union followed suit in june 2005.the aou has divided the many associated subspecies between both animals .
38  to the present species were assigned:the distinctions between the two geese have led to a great deal of confusion and debate among ornithologists .
39  this has been aggravated by the overlap between the small types of canada goose and larger types of cackling goose .
40  most interestingly , the old "lesser canada goose" was believed to be a partly hybrid population , with the birds named taverneri considered a mixture of minima , occidentalis and parvipes .
41  in addition , it has been determined that the barnacle goose is a derivative of the cackling goose lineage , whereas the hawaiian goose is an insular representative of the canada goose .
42 a recent proposed revision by harold hanson suggests splitting canada and cackling goose into six species and 200 subspecies .
43  the radical nature of this proposal has provoked surprise in some quarters; richard banks of the aou urges caution before any of hanson's proposals are accepted .
