0 the mottled duck (anas fulvigula){refn|group=note|etymology: anas , ancient greek for a duck .
1  fulvigula , "tan-throated", from latin fulva "tan" + gula , "throat" .
2 } or mottled mallard is a medium-sized dabbling duck .
3  it is intermediate in appearance between the female mallard and the american black duck .
4  it is closely related to those species , and is sometimes considered a subspecies of the former , but this is inappropriate (see systematics) .
5 there are two distinct populations of mottled ducks .
6  one population , a .
7  fulvigula maculosa (mottled duck), lives on the gulf of mexico coast between alabama and tamaulipas (mexico); outside the breeding season individual birds may venture as far south as to veracruz .
8  the other , a .
9  fulvigula fulvigula (florida duck), is resident in central and south florida and occasionally strays north to georgia .
10  the same disjunct distribution pattern was also historically found in the local sandhill cranes .
11 along the gulf of mexico coast , the mottled duck is one of the most frequently banded waterfowl .
12  this is due in part to the fact that it is mostly non-migratory .
13  approximately one out of every twenty mottled ducks is banded , making it an extremely prized and sought after bird among hunters .
14 ==description==the adult mottled duck is {convert|44|to(-)|61|cm|in|abbr=on} long from head to tail .
15  it has a dark body , lighter head and neck , orange legs and dark eyes .
16  both sexes have a shiny green-blue speculum (wing patch), which is not bordered with white as with the mallard .
17  males and females are similar , but the male's bill is bright yellow , whereas the female's is deep to pale orange , occasionally lined with black splotches around the edges and near the base .
18 the plumage is darker than in female mallards , especially at the tail , and the bill is yellower .
19  in flight , the lack of a white border to the speculum is a key difference .
20  the american black duck is darker than most mottled ducks , and its wing-patch is more purple than blue .
21  the behaviour and voice are the same as the mallard .
22 mottled ducks feed by dabbling in shallow water , and grazing on land .
23  they mainly eat plants , but also some mollusks and aquatic insects .
24  the ducks are fairly common within their restricted range; they are resident all-year round and do not migrate .
25  the breeding habitat is coastal marshes .
26  the nest is built on the ground amongst vegetation , such as bull-rush and marsh grass .
27 ==systematics==the floridan population , which occurs approximately south of tampa , is separated as the nominate subspecies anas fulvigula fulvigula and is occasionally called the florida duck or florida mallard .
28 {refn|group=note|it differs from the other subspecies , a .
29  f .
30  maculosa (etymology: maculosa , latin for "the mottled one" .
31 )} by being somewhat lighter in color and less heavily marked; while both subspecies are intermediate between female mallards and american black ducks , the florida mottled duck is closer to the former and the mottled duck closer to the latter in appearance; this is mainly recognizable in the lighter head being quite clearly separated from the darker breast in mottled , but much less so in florida mottled ducks .
32  as the subspecies' ranges do not overlap , these birds can only be confused with female mallards and american black ducks however; particularly female american black ducks are often only reliably separable by their dark purple speculum from mottled ducks in the field .
33 mtdna control region sequence data indicates that these birds are derived from ancestral american black ducks , being far more distantly related to the mallard , and that the subspecies , as a consequence of their rather limited range and sedentary habits , are genetically well distinct already .
34 as in all members of the "mallardine" clade of ducks , they are able to produce fertile hybrids with their close relatives , the american black duck and the mallard .
35  this has always been so to a limited extent; individuals of the migratory american black ducks which winter in the mottled duck's range may occasionally stay there and mate with the resident species , and for the mallard , which colonized north america later , the same holds true .
36 while the resultant gene flow is no cause for immediate concern ,{refn|group=note|except in a scientific sense , as it requires large sample sizes to appropriately study these ducks' phylogeny using mtdna sequence data , which only documents a bird's evolutionary history on the maternal side .
37 } habitat destruction and excessive hunting could eventually reduce this species to the point where the hybridization with mallards would threaten to make it disappear as a distinct taxon .
38  this especially applies to the florida duck , in the fairly small range of which rampant habitat destruction due to urbanization and draining of wetlands has taken place in the last decades; this in combination with climate change affecting the everglades could be sufficient to cause the florida duck to decline to a point where hunting would have to be restricted or prohibited .
39  at present , these birds too appear to be holding their own with a population of 50.000-70.000 individuals .
40 ==gallery== file:mottled duck pair rwd .
