0 the scaled quail (callipepla squamata), also commonly called blue quail or cottontop , is a species of the new world quail family .
1  it is a bluish gray bird found in the arid regions of the southwestern united states to central mexico .
2  this species is an early offshoot of the genus callipepla , diverging in the pliocene .
3 this bird is named for the scaly appearance of its breast and back feathers .
4  along with its scaly markings , the bird is easily identified by its white crest that resembles a tuft of cotton .
5 the nest is typically a grass-lined hollow containing 916 speckled eggs .
6  when disturbed , it prefers to run rather than fly .
7 widespread and common throughout its range , the scaled quail is evaluated as least concern on the iucn red list of threatened species .
8 ==distribution and taxonomy==scaled quail occur from south-central arizona , northern new mexico , east-central colorado , and southwestern kansas south through western oklahoma and western and central texas into mexico to northeastern jalisco , guanajuato , queretaru , hidalgo , and western tamaulipas .
9  it has been introduced to cuba , jamaica , haiti , dominican republic , puerto rico and to the united states in hawaii , central washington , eastern nevada , and nebraska , but is only considered established in central washington and eastern nevada .
10 scaled quail has formed several subspecies , 3 of which range into the usa:==plant communities==according to ligon , the distribution of scaled quail is largely coextensive with mesquite (prosopis spp .
11 ), condalia (condalia spp .
12 ), and cholla (cylindropuntia spp .
13 ) .
14 in oklahoma , scaled quail occur in sand sagebrush (artemisia filifolia)-grassland , pinyon-juniper (pinus spp .
15 -juniperus spp .
16 ), and shortgrass high plains .
17  sand sagebrush-grasslands include sand sagebrush , soapweed yucca (yucca glauca), skunkbush sumac (rhus trilobata), and sand plum (prunus watsonii) .
18  scaled quail in oklahoma inhabit rough or rolling land , especially where sagebrush (artemisia spp .
19 ), mesquite , cactus (opuntia spp .
20  and others), yucca (yucca spp .
21 ), juniper , sand shinnery oak (quercus havardii), and rocks furnish cover .
22 in colorado , scaled quail occupy sand sagebrush and/or yucca stands on sandy soils .
23  the cover types used byscaled quail in colorado are , in descending order , sand sagebrush-grassland , pinyon-juniper , dense cholla-grassland , dryland farmland , irrigated farmland , and greasewood (sarcobatus spp .
24 )-saltbush (atriplex spp .
25 ) washes .
26  scaled quail made little or no use of sparse cholla-grassland , riparian areas , reseeded grasslands , or shortgrass prairie disclimax .
27 ==timing of major life events==in arizona , pairing and maximum dispersal is complete by mid-june .
28  nesting probably does not begin until early july .
29  in oklahoma , egg laying usually starts in late april .
30  completed clutches have been found as early as may 8. egg laying occurs from march to june in texas and mexico , and from april to september in new mexico .
31  nests with eggs were reported as early as april 15 in new mexico .
32 scaled quail lay from 9 to 16 eggs; most clutches are 12 to 14 eggs .
33  eggs are incubated by the female for 21 to 23 days .
34  double-brooding (the production of two consecutive broods in one season) is common .
35  in west texas , wallmo  observed the male rearing the first brood while the female began a second clutch .
36  sutton  stated , however , that scaled quail in oklahoma are probably single-brooded , but have hatched broods as late as september 6. ehrlich and others  also list scaled quail as single-brooded .
37 the precocial young leave the nest shortly after hatching .
38  they are accompanied by at least one , usually both , parents , who show them how to find food .
39  the young fledge rapidly (age at fledging not reported in the literature), and are adult size in 11 to 15 weeks .
40 scaled quail are fairly sedentary .
41  the winter home ranges of scaled quail coveys varied from 24 to 84 acres (9.633.6 ha) .
42  the home ranges of separate coveys overlap only slightly or not at all .
43  from september to november scaled quail coveys maintain stable territories .
44  in arizona , 75 to 90% of a population apparently moved off of a breeding area by mid-november , moving to nearby mountain foothills .
45  the mountain habitat was consistent with that found on the breeding area .
46  in march the population on the breeding area increased again , with most birds in groups of four to eight .
47 the average winter covey size for scaled quail is around 30 birds , although coveys of up to 150 birds have been reported .
48 ==preferred habitat==scaled quail inhabit dry , open valleys , plains , foothills , rocky slopes , draws , gullies , and canyons that have a mixture of bare ground , low herbaceous growth , and scattered brushy cover .
49  good scaled quail habitat is characterized by low-growing grasses with forbs and shrubs .
50  overall ground cover is between 10 and 50% .
51  trees and shrubs should be less than 6.6 feet (2 m) tall .
52  scaled quail avoid the dense growth associated with streamsides .
53  transmitter-fitted scaled quail had individual home range sizes of 52 and 60 acres (21 and 24 ha) .
54 an absolute requirement by scaled quail for a source of open water has not been established; there is some debate in the literature whether there is such a requirement .
55  scaled quail have been reported as inhabiting an area 7 or 8 miles (11.212.8 km) from the nearest water in arizona .
56  in new mexico , it was not unusual to find scaled quail 10 to 15 miles (1624 km) from water .
57  wallmo  observed winter coveys 3 and 7 miles (1.8 and 11.2 km) from water in big bend national park in southwestern texas .
58 in arizona , scaled quail summer habitat is seldom within 660 feet (200 m) of water .
59  scaled quail were observed drinking at stock tanks from april to june (which was a dry period during the course of the study) every 2 to 3 days .
60  in oklahoma , scaled quail often migrate to farms and ranches in winter and are thus closer to a source of water in winter than in summer .
61  degraaf and others  reported that in winter , scaled quail are usually found within 1.25 miles (2 km) of a source of water .
62 ==cover requirements==feeding cover: scaled quail use grass clumps and shrubs for cover while feeding .
63  in one study they were frequently seen crossing 82 to 165 feet (2550 m) of bare ground .
64  when disturbed , scaled quail hid in snakeweed (gutierrezia spp .
65 ) or in grass clumps .
66  in june and july foraging occurs on open grasslands which are not used at other times .
67 loafing cover: scaled quail coveys occupy loafing or resting cover after early morning feeding periods .
68  scaled quail occupy desert grassland or desert scrub with a minimum of one loafing covert per approximately 70 acres (28 ha) .
69  in northwestern texas , loafing coverts were characterized by: (1) overhead woody cover , (2) lateral screening cover , (3) a central area with bare soil , and (4) one or more paths through the lateral cover .
70  covert heights ranged from 1.6 to 5.9 feet (0.51.8 m) and 2.6 to 6.9 feet (0.82.1 m) in diameter .
71  cholla formed all or part of the overhead cover of 85% of coverts , even though they were dominant at only 12% of the study locations .
72  in areas where scaled quail occur without cholla , woody species such as wolfberry (lycium spp .
73 ) and mesquite are important for overhead cover .
74  in oklahoma pinyon-juniper habitats , scaled quail use the shade of tree cholla (cylindropuntia imbricata) and human-made structures .
75  in arizona , scaled quail occupied wolfberry and mesquite 1.7 to 5 feet (0.51.5 m) tall for loafing cover .
76  this overhead cover provides midday shade , but is open at the base to allow easy escape from predators .
77  in oklahoma , winter home ranges always contained skunkbush sumac , tree cholla , or human-made structures providing overhead cover .
78 night-roosting cover: scaled quail roosts were observed in yucca (yucca angustifolia), tree cholla , and true mountain-mahogany (cercocarpus montanus)-yucca-fragrant sumac (rhus aromatica) vegetation types .
79  the height of vegetation used for night roosts was less than 1.6 feet (0.5 m) .
80 nesting cover: in march or april winter coveys spread out into areas with less cover .
81  this use of areas with less cover coincides with a seasonal decrease in the number of raptors in the same area .
82  scaled quail nests are constructed under tufts of grasses , and are sheltered by sagebrush (artemisia spp .
83 ), creosotebush (larrea tridentata), mesquite , catclaw acacia (acacia greggii), cactus , or yucca; under dead russian-thistle (salsola kali), mixed forbs , or soapweed yucca; or sheltered in old machinery or other human-made debris .
84  in oklahoma , 66% of nests were in one of four situations: (1) dead russian-thistle , (2) machinery and junk , (3) mixed forbs , and (4) soapweed yucca .
85  in new mexico , ordination of breeding birds and vegetative microhabitats indicated that scaled quail were associated with increased levels of patchiness and increased cover of mesquite and cactus .
86 ==food habits==scaled quail are opportunistic eaters .
87  seeds are consumed year-round .
88  large seeds (such as those of mesquite and snakeweed) are important in scaled quail diets .
89  other seeds include those of elbowbush (forestiera angustifolia), catclaw acacia , mesquite , hackberry (celtis spp .
90 ), russian-thistle , rough pigweed (amaranthus retroflexus), and sunflowers , ragweeds (ambrosia spp .
91 ), and other asteraceous plants .
92  scaled quail consume more grass seeds than do other quail species .
93  other dietary components include leaves , fruits , and insects .
94  summer diets are high in green vegetation and insects , which are also important sources of moisture .
95 in oklahoma , small groups of scaled quail feed among soapweed yucca and in soapweed yucca-sand sagebrush ranges , weed patches , and grain stubble .
96  also in oklahoma , early winter foods apparently eaten when other foods are not available included snow-on-the-mountain (euphorbia marginata), sand paspalum (paspalum stramineum), field sandbur (cenchrus pauciflorus), purslane (portulaca spp .
97 ), skunkbush sumac , fendler spurge (euphorbia fendleri), and leaf bugs .
98  jimsonweed (datura stramonium) and juniper berries were always avoided .
99  winter foods of the scaled quail in oklahoma include russian-thistle and sunflower (helianthus spp .
100 ) seeds .
101 in northwestern texas , selection of foods by scaled quail was dependent on foraging techniques , availability , and seed size .
102  small seeds were selected when they were still on the plant and could be easily stripped , but were not eaten once they had fallen , presumably because they were too small and/or too hard to find .
103  broom snakeweed (gutierrezia sarothrae) was a staple in winter diets; it was not highly selected but was consumed in proportion to its availability (and lack of availability of choice items) .
104  generally , in texas grass seeds (mainly tall dropseed [sporobolus asper] and rough tridens [tridens muticus]) were major constituents of scaled quail diets .
105  this was attributed to a precipitation pattern that resulted in a relatively higher amount of grass seed available , and a lower amount of available forbs .
106  in the same study green vegetation formed a higher proportion of the diet than reported for other areas .
107 in southwestern texas , chestnut-bellied scaled quail consumed woody plant seeds and green vegetation .
108  the seeds of brush species comprised 68% of the contents of 32 scaled quail crops .
109  green food , chiefly wild carrot (daucus carota) and clover (trifolium spp .
110 ) made up 7.17% .
111  elbowbush was the single most important source , followed by roemer acacia (acacia roemeriana), desert-yaupon (schaefferia cuneifolia), and spiny hackberry (celtis pallida) .
112 in southeastern new mexico , staples (comprising at least 5% of scaled quail diet in both summer and winter) were mesquite and croton (croton spp .
113 ) seeds , green vegetation , and snout beetles .
114  nonpreferred foods eaten in winter and available but not consumed in summer included broom snakeweed (the main winter food), crown-beard (verbesina encelioides), cycloloma (cycloloma atriplicifolium), and lace bugs .
115  mesquite seeds and broom snakeweed seeds together made up 75% of the winter diet .
116  grasshoppers were a summer staple .
117  insect galls , cicadas , scarab beetles , spurge (euphorbia spp .
118 ), plains bristlegrass (setaria macrostachya) seeds , and white ratany (krameria grayi) were consumed in a less pronounced seasonal pattern .
119  another study reported substantial amounts of prairie sunflower seeds (helianthus petiolaris) and pigweed (amaranthus spp .
120 ) seeds in the diet of scaled quail .
121 scaled quail feed in alfalfa (medicago spp .
122 ) fields .
123 ==predators==in arizona , potential scaled quail predators include mammals , birds , and reptiles .
124  most scaled quail kills are made by avian predators including northern harrier (circus cyaneus), red-tailed hawk (buteo jamaicensis), american kestrel (falco sparverius), prairie falcon (falco mexicanus), and great horned owl (bubo virginianus) .
125  in new mexico , predators on scaled quail include hawks , owls , coyote (canis latrans), and snakes .
126  in colorado , potential predators of scaled quail include coyote , gray fox (urocyon cinereoargenteus), red fox (vulpes vulpes), kit fox (v .
127  velox), bobcat (lynx rufus), northern harrier , rough-legged hawk (buteo lagopus), prairie falcon , peregrine falcon (falco peregrinus), american kestrel , golden eagle (aquila chrysaetos), and bald eagle (haliaeetus leucocephalus) .
128 scaled quail are popular gamebirds .
