0 the green heron (butorides virescens) is a small heron of north and central america .
1  it was long considered conspecific with its sister species the striated heron (butorides striata), and together they were called "green-backed heron" .
2  birds of the nominate subspecies (no matter which taxonomic arrangement is preferred) are extremely rare vagrants to western europe; individuals from the pacific coast of north america may similarly stray as far as hawaii .
3 ==description==the green heron is relatively small; adult body length is about {convert|44|cm|0|abbr=on} .
4  the neck is often pulled in tight against the body .
5  adults have a glossy , greenish-black cap , a greenish back and wings that are grey-black grading into green or blue , a chestnut neck with a white line down the front , grey underparts and short yellow legs .
6  the bill is dark with a long , sharp point .
7  female adults tend to be smaller than males , and have duller and lighter plumage , particularly in the breeding season .
8  juveniles are duller , with the head sides , neck and underparts streaked brown and white , tan-splotched back and wing coverts , and greenish-yellow legs and bill .
9  hatchlings are covered in down feathers , light grey above , and white on the belly .
10 the green heron's call is a loud and sudden kyow; it also makes a series of more subdued kuk calls .
11  during courtship , the male gives a raah-rahh call with wide-open bill , makes noisy wingbeats and whoom-whoom-whoom calls in flight , and sometimes calls roo-roo to the female before landing again .
12  while sitting , an aaroo-aaroo courtship call is also given .
13 ==taxonomy==as noted above , this species was formerly included in b .
14  striata , which at that time was erroneously known as b .
15  striatus .
16  the early pleistocene b .
17  validipes , whose fossil remains were discovered in florida , might have been the ancestor of the green heron as the living species seems to replace the extinct relative in the fossil record .
18 subspecies distinction is uncertain at best .
19  the color variation between populations is less pronounced than between birds of the same population .
20  migratory populations are longer-winged than those resident year round , but this cannot be used to delimit subspecies as it is quite obviously is a consequence of differing habits and can be expected to undergo convergent evolution in unrelated populations of this species that just share the same habits .
21  thus , thorough molecular phylogenetic studies would be required to resolve the question of subspecies delimitation .
22 the following subspecies are commonly listed , though the validity of most of them is seriously disputed:much of the dispute hinges upon the distinctness of the caribbean and central american populations , the second taxon in this species to be described .
23  to describe the two most extreme views , some authors assemble the bulk of the mainland population in the nominate subspecies but treat the parapatric populations as distinct subspecies , while others place all resident populations in maculata and all migratory ones in virescens .
24 ==ecology==the habitat of the green heron is small wetlands in low-lying areas .
25  the species is most conspicuous during dusk and dawn , and if anything these birds are nocturnal rather than diurnal , preferring to retreat to sheltered areas in daytime .
26  they feed actively during the day , however , if hungry or provisioning young .
27  shore-living individuals adapt to the rhythm of the tides .
28  they mainly eat small fish , frogs and aquatic arthropods , but may take any invertebrate or vertebrate prey they can catch , including such animals like leeches and mice .
29  green herons are intolerant of other birds  including conspecifics  when feeding and are not seen to forage in groups .
30  they typically stand still on shore or in shallow water or perch upon branches and await prey .
31  sometimes they drop food , insects , or other small objects on the water's surface to attract fish , making them one of the few known tool-using species .
32  this feeding method has led some to title the green and closely related striated heron as among the world's most intelligent birds .
33  they are able to hover briefly to catch prey .
34 the northern population moves to its breeding ranges during march and april; near the northernmost limit of the green heron's range , breeding is well underway by the end of may .
35  the migration to the winter quarters starts in september; by late october , the birds are absent from regions where they do not stay all year .
36  at least the northward migration does not seem to be affected by global warming; birds appear in their breeding ranges at the same time they did 100 years ago .
37 individuals of non-migratory populations abandon their territories after breeding season to roam about the region .
38  they may or may not return to the previous year's breeding location , depending on whether they found better habitat during these wanderings .
39  in these populations , the breeding season is determined by rainfall and consequent prey availability .
40 green herons are seasonally monogamous .
41  the pairs form in the breeding range , after an intense courtship display by the males , who select the nesting sites and fly in front of the female noisily and with puffed-up head and neck plumage .
42  they nest in forest and swamp patches , over water or in plants near water .
43  nests are a platform of sticks , often in shrubs or trees , sometimes on the ground .
44  locations in trees are preferred , with some nests built up to {convert|20|m|abbr=on} off the ground although heights of several meters are more common .
45  rarely , large numbers of these birds congregate in heronries for nesting .
46 the clutch is usually 26 pale green eggs , which are laid in 2-day intervals (though the second egg may be laid up to 6 days later than the first) .
47  after the last egg has been laid , both parents incubate for about 1921 days until hatching , and feed the young birds .
48  the frequency of feedings decreases as the offspring near fledging .
49  the young sometimes start to leave the nest at 16 days of age , but are not fully fledged and able to fend for themselves until 3035 days old .
50  sometimes  particularly in the tropical parts of its range  the green heron breeds twice a year .
51 ==tool use==green herons are one of the few species of animal known to use tools .
52  in particular , they commonly use bread crusts , insects , or other items as bait .
53  the bait is dropped onto the surface of a body of water in order to lure fish .
54  when a fish takes the bait , the green heron will then grab and eat the fish .
55 ==gallery==file:green heron nestlings .
56 jpg|nestlings image:green heron4.jpg|subadult retaining some juvenile plumage file:green_heron_(butorides_virescens_virescens)_young_adult .
57 jpg|young adult b .
58  v .
59  virescens file:green heron at dunes golf course , sanibel .
