0 the white-faced ibis (plegadis chihi) is a wading bird in the ibis family threskiornithidae .
1 this species breeds colonially in marshes , usually nesting in bushes or low trees .
2  its breeding range extends from the western united states south through mexico , as well as from southeastern brazil and southeastern bolivia south to central argentina , and along the coast of central chile .
3  its winter range extends from southern california and louisiana south to include the rest of its breeding range .
4 ==description==the white-faced ibis is very similar to the glossy ibis in its non-breeding plumages , but it tends to be slightly smaller and the plumage color is somewhat warmer .
5  breeding adults have a pink bare face bordered with white feathers (rather than a bluish bare face with no bordering feathers), a grey bill , and brighter colored , redder legs .
6  adults have red eyes year-round , whereas glossy ibises have dark eyes .
7  juveniles of the two species are nearly identical .
8   white-faced ibis by dan pancamo .
9 jpg|winter quintana , texas white-faced ibis .
10 jpg|non-breeding plumage white-faced ibis (plegadis chihi) immature in flight composite .
11 jpg|juvenilethe pantanal , brazil ==distribution==the white-faced ibis occurs in canada , the united states , central america and the southern half of south america .
12   in 2012, the total population size was estimated to be 1.2 million individuals , and increasing .
13  the iucn rates it as being of least concern .
14 ==origin==the white-faced ibis bears a strong resemblance to the related glossy ibis and in the past was sometimes considered to be a subspecies of the glossy ibis .
15  another theory was that upon coming to the new world , a small isolated glossy ibis population evolved to become its own separate species .
16  however , recent molecular phylogenetic studies show that the white-faced ibis may actually be paraphyletic .
17  in fact , members of the white-faced ibis populations in the united states appear to be more closely related to glossy ibises than to members of white-faced ibis populations in southern brazil .
18 ==feeding==the white-faced ibis eats a variety of organisms , including many invertebrates such as insects , leeches , snails and earthworms .
19  it may also eat vertebrates such as fish , crayfish , newts , and frogs .
20  its feeding style is to use its bill to probe for prey .
21 ==breeding and nesting==this species breeds colonially in marshes , usually nesting in bushes or low trees .
22  its breeding range extends from the western united states south through mexico , as well as from southeastern brazil and southeastern bolivia south to central argentina , and along the coast of central chile .
23  its winter range extends from southern california and louisiana south to include the rest of its breeding range .
24  the white-faced ibis chooses to nest in the parts of a marsh with dense vegetation  such as bulrush , cattails , shrubs and short trees .
25  it will then build a nest from reeds .
26  the white-faced ibis usually lays three or four blue-green eggs at a time .
27 ==lifespan==white-faced ibises in captivity live up to fourteen years on average .
28  in the wild , white-faced ibises usually live for nine years; however the oldest recorded wild white-faced ibis lived for fourteen years and six months .
29 ==threats==in the past , the white-faced ibis faced many threats from humans .
30  studies completed in utah in the 1960s (before this species was added to the migratory bird treaty act) showed that 82.9% of recorded deaths in banded birds were a result of being shot .
31  however , the main causes of decline of this species previously were pesticides and habitat destruction .
32  the pesticide ddt caused eggshells to be so thin and fragile that parent white-faced ibises crushed the eggs when they were incubating them .
33  also , since this species is so dependent on wetlands and marshes for both feeding and nesting , changes to water systems such as pollution and man-made draining of water habitats had devastating impacts on members of this species in the past .
34  in order to correct these damages , ddt was banned in 1970 and various programs were created to better maintain and protect wetland nesting habitats .
35  yet , there is still some debate as to whether or not populations of white-faced ibises in all geographic areas are recovered and growing .
