0 the black vulture (coragyps atratus) also known as the american black vulture , is a bird in the new world vulture family whose range extends from the southeastern united states to central chile and uruguay in south america .
1  although a common and widespread species , it has a somewhat more restricted distribution than its compatriot , the turkey vulture , which breeds well into canada and south to tierra del fuego .
2  despite the similar name and appearance , this species is unrelated to the eurasian black vulture .
3  the latter species is an old world vulture in the family accipitridae (which includes eagles , hawks , kites and harriers), whereas the american species is a new world vulture .
4  it is the only extant member of the genus coragyps , which is in the family cathartidae .
5  it inhabits relatively open areas which provide scattered forests or shrublands .
6  with a wingspan of {convert|1.5|m|ft|abbr = on}, the black vulture is a large bird though relatively small for a vulture .
7  it has black plumage , a featherless , grayish-black head and neck , and a short , hooked beak .
8 the black vulture is a scavenger and feeds on carrion , but will also eat eggs or kill newborn animals .
9  in areas populated by humans , it also feeds at garbage dumps .
10  it finds its meals either by using its keen eyesight or by following other (new world) vultures , which possess a keen sense of smell .
11  lacking a syrinxthe vocal organ of birdsits only vocalizations are grunts or low hisses .
12  it lays its eggs in caves or hollow trees or on the bare ground , and generally raises two chicks each year , which it feeds by regurgitation .
13  in the united states , the vulture receives legal protection under the migratory bird treaty act of 1918. this vulture also appeared in mayan codices .
14 ==taxonomy==the common name "vulture" is derived from the latin word vulturus , which means "tearer" and is a reference to its feeding habits .
15  the species name , atratus , means "clothed in black ," from the latin ater 'black' .
16  the genus name , coragyps means "raven-vulture", from a contraction of the greek corax/ and gyps/ for the respective birds .
17  the family name , cathartidae , means "purifier" and is also derived from the greek katharts/ .
18 the exact taxonomic placement of the black vulture and the remaining six species of new world vultures remains unclear .
19  though both are similar in appearance and have similar ecological roles , the new world and old world vultures evolved from different ancestors in different parts of the world .
20  just how different the two are is currently under debate , with some earlier authorities suggesting that the new world vultures are more closely related to storks .
21  more recent authorities maintain their overall position in the order falconiformes along with the old world vultures , or place them in their own order , cathartiformes .
22  the south american classification committee has removed the new world vultures from ciconiiformes and instead placed them in incertae sedis , but notes that a move to falconiformes or cathartiformes is possible .
23 there are three subspecies of black vulture:===evolutionary history of coragyps===from the early to the late pleistocene , a prehistoric species of black vulture , coragyps occidentalis , known as the pleistocene black vulture or  somewhat in error  the "western black vulture", occurred across the present species' range .
24  this bird did not differ much from the black vulture of today except in size; it was some 1015% larger , and had a relatively flatter and wider bill .
25  it filled the same ecological niche as the living form , and indeed seems to have evolved into it by decreasing in size during the last ice age .
26  well documented from fossil bones , the genus coragyps gives a rare glimpse in the evolutionary dynamics of two chronospecies .
27  the final stages of this evolutionary transformation must have been witnessed by humans: a subfossil bone of the extinct species was found in an paleo indian to early archaic (90008000 years bce) midden at five mile rapids near the dalles , oregon .
28 fossil (or subfossil) black vultures cannot necessarily be attributed to the pleistocene or the recent species without further information: the same size variation found in the living bird was also present in its larger prehistoric relative .
29  thus , in 1968, hildegarde howard separated the mexican birds as coragyps occidentalis mexicanus as opposed to the birds from locations farther north (such as rancho la brea) which constituted the nominate subspecies c .
30  o .
31  occidentalis .
32  the southern birds were of the same size as present-day north black vultures and can only be distinguished by their somewhat stouter tarsometatarsus and the flatter and wider bills , and even then only with any certainty if the location where the fossils were found is known .
33  as the pleistocene and current black vultures form an evolutionary continuum rather than splitting into two or more lineages , some include the pleistocene taxa in c .
34  atratus .
35 ==description==the black vulture is a fairly large bird of prey , measuring {convert|56|-|74|cm|in|abbr=on} in length , with a {convert|1.33||1.67|m|in|abbr=on} wingspan .
36  weight for black vultures from north america and the andes ranges from {convert|1.6||2.75|kg|lb|abbr = on} but in the smaller vultures of the tropical lowlands it is {convert|1.18||1.94|kg|lb|abbr = on} .
37  50 vultures in texas were found to average {convert|2.15|kg|lb|abbr=on} while 119 birds in venezuela were found to average {convert|1.64|kg|lb|abbr=on} .
38  the extended wing bone measures {convert|38.6|-|45|cm|in|abbr=on}, the shortish tail measures {convert|16|-|21|cm|in|abbr=on} and the relatively long tarsus measures {convert|7|-|8.5|cm|in|abbr=on} .
39  its plumage is mainly glossy black .
40  the head and neck are featherless and the skin is dark gray and wrinkled .
41  the iris of the eye is brown and has a single incomplete row of eyelashes on the upper lid and two rows on the lower lid .
42  the legs are grayish white , while the two front toes of the foot are long and have small webs at their bases .
43  the feet are flat , relatively weak , and are poorly adapted to grasping; the talons are also not designed for grasping , as they are relatively blunt .
44 the nostrils are not divided by a septum , but rather are perforate; from the side one can see through the beak .
45  the wings are broad but relatively short .
46  the bases of the primary feathers are white , producing a white patch on the underside of the wing's edge , which is visible in flight .
47  the tail is short and square , barely reaching past the edge of the folded wings .
48  the subspecies differ in size according to bergmann's rule , and the amount of white underwing coloration also varies .
49  as it probably forms a cline over its entire range , the species is often considered monotypic .
50 a leucistic coragyps atratus brasiliensis was observed in pias , ecuador in 2005. it had white plumage overall , with only the tarsus and tail as well as some undertail feathers being black .
51  it was not an albino as its skin seemed to have had the normal , dark color and it was part of a flock of some twenty normally plumaged individuals .
52 ==distribution and habitat==the black vulture has a nearctic and neotropic distribution .
53  its range includes the mid-atlantic , including new jersey , the southern united states , mexico , central america and most of south america .
54  it is usually a permanent resident throughout its range , although birds at the extreme north of its range may migrate short distances , and others across their range may undergo local movements in unfavourable conditions .
55  in south america , its range stretches to central chile and argentina .
56  it also is found as a vagrant on the islands of the caribbean .
57  it prefers open land interspersed with areas of woods or brush .
58  it is also found in moist lowland forests , shrublands and grasslands , wetlands and swamps , pastures , and heavily degraded former forests .
59  preferring lowlands , it is rarely seen in mountainous areas .
60  it is usually seen soaring or perched on fence posts or dead trees .
61 this bird with its somehow crow-like aspect gave foot to the naming of the quebrada de los cuervos (crows ravine) in uruguay , where they dwell together with the lesser yellow-headed vulture and the turkey vulture .
62 ==ecology and behavior==it soars high while searching for food , holding its wings horizontally when gliding .
63  it flaps in short bursts which are followed by short periods of gliding .
64  its flight is less efficient than that of other vultures , as the wings are not as long , forming a smaller wing area .
65  in comparison with the turkey vulture , the black vulture flaps its wings more frequently during flight .
66  it is known to regurgitate when approached or disturbed , which assists in predator deterrence and taking flight by decreasing its takeoff weight .
67  like all new world vultures , the black vulture often defecates on its own legs , using the evaporation of the water in the feces and/or urine to cool itself , a process known as urohidrosis .
68  it cools the blood vessels in the unfeathered tarsi and feet , and causes white uric acid to streak the legs .
69  because it lacks a syrinx , the black vulture , like other new world vultures , has very few vocalization capabilities .
70  it is generally silent , but can make hisses and grunts when agitated or while feeding .
71  the black vulture is gregarious , and roosts in large groups .
72  in areas where their ranges overlap , the black vulture will roost on the bare branches of dead trees alongside groups of turkey vultures .
73  the black vulture generally forages in groups; a flock of black vultures can easily drive a rival turkey vulture , which is generally solitary while foraging , from a carcass .
74 like the turkey vulture , this vulture is often seen standing in a spread-winged stance .
75  the stance is believed to serve multiple functions: drying the wings , warming the body , and baking off bacteria .
76  this same behavior is displayed by other new world vultures , old world vultures , and storks .
77 ===diet===in natural settings , the black vulture eats mainly carrion .
78  in areas populated by humans , it may scavenge at garbage dumps , but also takes eggs and decomposing plant material and can kill or injure newborn or incapacitated mammals .
79  like other vultures , it plays an important role in the ecosystem by disposing of carrion which would otherwise be a breeding ground for disease .
80  the black vulture locates food either by sight or by following new world vultures of the genus cathartes to carcasses .
81  these vulturesthe turkey vulture , the lesser yellow-headed vulture , and the greater yellow-headed vulture forage by smell , an ability which is uncommon in the avian world .
82  they fly low to the ground to pick up the scent of ethyl mercaptan , a gas produced by the beginnings of decay in dead animals .
83  their heightened ability to detect odors allows them to search for carrion below the forest canopy .
84  king vultures and black vultures , which lack the ability to smell carrion , follow them to carcasses .
85  it is aggressive when feeding , and may chase the slightly larger turkey vulture from carcasses .
86 the black vulture also occasionally feeds on livestock or deer .
87  it is the only species of new world vulture which preys on cattle .
88  it occasionally harasses cows which are giving birth , but primarily preys on newborn calves .
89  in its first few weeks , a calf will allow vultures to approach it .
90  the vultures swarm the calf in a group , then peck at the calf's eyes , or at the nose or the tongue .
91  the calf then goes into shock and is killed by the vultures .
92 black vultures have sometimes been seen to pick ticks off resting capybaras .
93 ===reproduction===the timing of black vultures' breeding season varies with the latitude at which they live .
94  in the united states , birds in florida begin breeding as early as january , for example , while those in ohio generally do not start before march .
95  in south america , argentinian and chilean birds begin egg-laying as early as september , while those further north on the continent typically wait until october .
96  some in south america breed even later than thatblack vultures in trinidad typically do not start until november , for example , and those in ecuador may wait until february .
97  pairs are formed following a courtship ritual which is performed on the ground: several males circle a female with their wings partially open as they strut and bob their heads .
98  they sometimes perform courtship flights , diving or chasing each other over their chosen nest site .
99 the black vulture lays its eggs on the ground in a wooded area , a hollow log , or some other cavity , seldom more than {convert|3|m|abbr = on} above the ground .
100  while it generally does not use any nesting materials , it may decorate the area around the nest with bits of brightly colored plastic , shards of glass , or metal items such as bottle caps .
101  clutch size is generally two eggs , though this can vary from one to three .
102  the egg is oval and on average measures {convert|7.56|x|5.09|cm|in|abbr = on} .
103  the smooth , gray-green , bluish , or white shell is variably blotched or spotted with lavender or pale brown around the larger end .
104  both parents incubate the eggs , which hatch after 28 to 41 days .
105  upon hatching , the young are covered with white down .
106  both parents feed the nestlings , regurgitating food at the nest site .
107  the young remain in the nest for two months , and after 75 to 80 days they are able to fly skillfully .
108  predation of black vultures is relatively unlikely , though eggs and nestlings are readily eaten if found by mammalian predators such as raccoons , coatis and foxes .
109  due to its aggressiveness and size , few predators can threaten the fully-grown vulture .
110  however , various eagles may kill vultures in conflicts and even the ornate hawk-eagle , a slightly smaller bird than the vulture , have preyed on adult black vultures .
111 ==relationship with humans==the black vulture is considered a threat by cattle ranchers due to its predation on newborn cattle .
112  the droppings produced by black vultures and other vultures can harm or kill trees and other vegetation .
113  the bird is also considered a threat to the safety of aerial traffic , especially when it congregates in large numbers in the vicinity of garbage dumps  as is the case in the rio de janeiro tom jobim international airport .
114 the black vulture can be held in captivity , though the migratory bird treaty act only allows this in the case of animals which are injured or unable to return to the wild .
115  it receives special legal protections under the migratory bird treaty act of 1918 in the united states , by the convention for the protection of migratory birds in canada , and by the convention for the protection of migratory birds and game mammals in mexico .
116  in the united states it is illegal to take , kill , or possess black vultures and violation of the law is punishable by a fine of up to us$15,000 and imprisonment of up to six months .
117  it is listed as a species of least concern by the iucn red list .
118  populations appear to remain stable , and it has not reached the threshold of inclusion as a threatened species , which requires a decline of more than 30% in ten years or three generations .
119 the black vulture appears in a variety of maya hieroglyphics in mayan codices .
120  it is normally connected with either death or as a bird of prey .
121  the vulture's glyph is often shown attacking humans .
122  this species lacks the religious connections that the king vulture has .
123  while some of the glyphs clearly show the black vulture's open nostril and hooked beak , some are assumed to be this species because they are vulture-like but lack the king vulture's knob and are painted black .
