0 the prairie falcon (falco mexicanus) is a medium-sized falcon of western north america .
1 it is about the size of a peregrine falcon or a crow , with an average length of 40 cm (16 in), wingspan of 1 metre (40 in), and weight of 720 g (1.6 lb) .
2  as in all falcons , females are noticeably bigger than males .
3 it breeds from southern manitoba , saskatchewan , alberta and south-central british columbia south through the western united statesroughly between the eastern edge of the mountain time zone and the cascade mountains , as well as the central valley of californiato the mexican states of baja california , durango , and northern san luis potos .
4  it is much less migratory than the other north american falcons , but in winter it does withdraw somewhat from the northernmost and highest-elevation parts of its breeding range and spreads west to the deserts and pacific coast of california , east to about the 100th meridian , and south to baja california sur , jalisco , and hidalgo .
5 ==description==plumage is warm gray-brown (sometimes called "sandy") above and pale with more or less dark mottling below .
6  the darkest part of the upper side is the primary wing feathers; the lightest is the rump and tail , particularly the outer tail feathers .
7  the head has a "moustache" mark like a peregrine falcon's but narrower , and a white line over the eye .
8  a conspicuous character is that the axillars ("wingpits") and underwing coverts are black , except along the leading edge of the wing .
9  this creates an effect of "struts" from the body along each wing .
10 juveniles resemble adults except that they have dark streaks on the breast and belly and darker , less grayish upperparts .
11 calls , heard mostly near the nest , are described as repetitive kree kree kree , kik kik kik , and the like , similar to the peregrine's but higher-pitched .
12 experts can separate a distant prairie falcon from a peregrine (generally the only similar species in its range) by its shape and flight style .
13  the prairie falcon has a longer tail in proportion to its size; a more tubular , less stocky body; and the wing joint farther from the body .
14  its wingbeats are described as strong and shallow like the peregrine's and having the same quick cadence , but stiffer and more mechanical .
15 ==systematics==the prairie falcon outwardly resembles the peregrine as well as the old world "hierofalcons", especially the saker falcon .
16  it was often considered the only new world member of the latter group .
17  however , this is implausible for reasons of biogeography , and more recently , falco mexicanus is considered an early aridland offshoot of the peregrine falcon lineage , much as the hierofalcons represent a later divergence that similarly adapted to arid habitat .
18  thus , the similarities between the prairie falcon and the hierofalcons are a good example of convergent evolution , the present species and such old world forms as the saker and lanner falcons being not close relatives but ecological equivalents .
19 ==ecology and reproduction==the habitat is open country , especially arid , in summer including alpine tundra to shortgrass prairie and high desert .
20  in winter it is more widespread , ranging to low deserts and occasionally to towns .
21 the prairie falcon eats mostly small mammals (especially in summer) and smaller birds caught in flight .
22  like the merlin , it often hunts by flying fast and low , at a height of only a metre or so , hoping to find surprised prey as it comes over the terrain or around a bush .
23  its cruising speed is estimated at 72 km/h (45 mph) and it accelerates in the chase .
24   it also pursues prey sighted from a perch , again often flying very low .
25  it typically catches birds by pursuing them in level flight and grasping them , less often knocking them down in spectacular dives like the peregrine .
26 this species nests on cliff ledges , so breeding adults are local during the breeding season .
27  the clutch averages four eggs , which are subelliptical and pinkish with brown , reddish-brown , and purplish dots .
28   the incubation period is 31 days , beginning with the 2nd to last or last egg laid .
29   incubation becomes more intense after later eggs are laid , somewhat evening out hatching times .
30   as is typical for falcons , the female does most of the incubating and brooding , and the male brings most of the food , with the female also hunting after the young are 12 to 14 days old .
31  the young fledge from 36 to 41 days after hatching and remain with the family for a short time before dispersing .
32 ==relationship with humans==this species is often  used in falconry .
33  although it is considered hard to train and unpredictable , it's the most popular falcon in the united states , due to its abundance and relative ease to acquire .
34  it is also valued for its aggressiveness (observers of wild birds and veterinarians agree with falconers that it is one of the most aggressive raptors {citation needed|date=november 2008}) .
35  the smaller and more agile males are particularly effective in the taking of small game birds such as dove and quail , while the larger and more powerful females reliably take larger game up through the size of ducks .
36  it is sometimes hybridized with peregrine falcons and gyrfalcons .
37 the population is estimated to be stable or increasing at over 5000 pairs , with perhaps 200 pairs breeding at the snake river birds of prey national conservation area in idaho .
38 ==gallery== image:falco mexicanus -avian conservation center , near charleston , south carolina , usa-8a .
