0 the killdeer (charadrius vociferus) is a medium-sized plover .
1 the adults have a brown back and wings , a white belly , and a white breast with two black bands .
2  the rump is tawny orange .
3  the face and cap are brown with a white forehead .
4  the eyering is orange-red .
5  the chicks are patterned almost identically to the adults , and are precocial  able to move around immediately after hatching .
6  the killdeer frequently uses a "broken wing act" to distract predators from the nest .
7  it is named onomatopoeically after its call .
8 ==description==adult killdeer range in length from {convert|23||27|cm|in|abbr=on} with a wingspan averaging {convert|17.5|cm|in|abbr=on} .
9  the largest ringed plover , killdeer weigh {convert|88|g|oz|abbr=on} on average .
10 killdeer have a characteristic large , round head , long tail , long flesh-colored legs , and long wings .
11  the bill is short , dark , and thick .
12  plumage is brownish-tan on dorsal areas and white on the ventral belly and chest; the neck is also surrounded by a white collar .
13  two large , dark bands surround the upper breast with an additional band located on the head , spanning both the forehead and the area above the bill and continuing around the back of the head .
14  the tail is brown with a black subterminal band , a white terminal band , and white outer tail feathers .
15  additional defining plumage characters include a brightly colored red-orange rump that is visible during flight and displays , white wing stripes visible during flight .
16  appearance does not vary between males and females , although breeding females may have additional brown plumage on the head .
17  juveniles resemble adults with the exception of buff fringe feathers and the presence of only one neck band ==habitat==during nesting season killdeer use open dry uplands , open areas where vegetation is short or absent , agricultural field , and meadows .
18  in addition , hayman et al .
19  document killdeer use of open wetland habitat and savannahs , selecting dry bare ground and dry ground with vegetation within wetland areas .
20  nesting habitat is characterized as having enough nest materials to form a scrape but otherwise having little or no vegetation; killdeer have also been recorded using gravel roofs as nesting habitat .
21 during the non-breeding season killdeer use coastal wetland and beach habitat as well as coastal fields .
22  ogden et al .
23  suggest that coastal open-soil agricultural lands supplement intertidal habitat frequently used by killdeer during the non-breeding season .
24  because fertilizer application as well as the prevention of habitat fragmentation benefits killdeer as well as a host of other migratory shorebirds , maintaining a mosaic of habitat in coastal farmland areas is optimal for maintaining killdeer populations .
25 ==nesting==the range of the killdeer spreads across the western hemisphere .
26  in the summer , killdeer live as far north as the canadian provinces of british columbia , alberta ,the yukon and quebec , as well as the southern parts of the u.s.
28  state of alaska .
29  killdeer hold a year-round presence across the southern half of the united states and parts of peru .
30  the killdeer winters throughout central america .
31  although killdeer are considered shorebirds , they often live far from water .
32  they live in grassland habitats such as fields , meadows , and pastures .
33  the nest itself is merely a shallow depression or bowl in the ground , fringed by some stones and blades of grass .
34  the nest is well camouflaged , as the spots of the eggs disguise them as stones , and the simple structure of the nest resembles its surroundings .
35  like many other waders , killdeer hatchlings are precocial birds and are able to see and forage soon after hatching .
36 ==behavior==they are migratory in northern areas and winter as far south as northern south america .
37  they are rare vagrants to western europe , usually late in the year .
38 these birds forage for food in fields , mudflats , and shores , usually by sight .
39  they mainly eat insects .
40  in built up areas they will forage in large parking lots .
41  if those lots are well lit , they may forage at night .
42 their name comes from their frequently heard call .
43  these birds will frequently use a distraction display ("broken-wing act") to distract predators from their nests .
44  this involves the bird walking away from its nesting area holding its wing in a position that simulates an injury and then flapping around on the ground emitting a distress call .
45  the predators then think they have easy prey and are attracted to this seemingly injured bird and away from the nest .
46  if the parent sees that a potential predator is not following them , they will move closer and get louder until they get the attention of the predator .
47  this is repeated until the predator is far from the nest , and the killdeer suddenly "heals" and flies away .
48 their ability to exploit a wide range of agricultural and semi-urban habitat has helped keep them common and widespread in their range .
