0 the black oystercatcher (haematopus bachmani) is a conspicuous black bird found on the shoreline of western north america .
1  it ranges from the aleutian islands of alaska to the coast of the baja california peninsula .
2 the black oystercatcher is the only representative of the oystercatcher family (haematopodidae) over most of its range , overlapping slightly with the american oystercatcher (h .
3  palliatus) on the coast of baja california .
4  within its range it is most commonly referred to as the black oystercatcher , although this name is also used locally for the blackish oystercatcher and the african oystercatcher .
5  its scientific name is derived by john james audubon from that of his friend john bachman .
6 although the species is not considered threatened , its global population size is estimated between 8,90011,000 individuals .
7   the black oystercatcher is a species of high conservation concern throughout its range (u.s.
9 , canadian , alaskan , and northern & southern pacific shorebird conservation plans), a keystone indicator species along the north pacific shoreline , a management indicator species in the chugach national forest , and a u.s.
11  fish & wildlife service focal species for priority conservation action .
12 == description ==the black oystercatcher is a large entirely black shorebird , with a long (9 cm) bright red bill and pink legs .
13  it has a bright yellow iris and a red eye-ring .
14  its plumage varies slightly from north to south , being darker further north .
15 == behavior ==the black oystercatcher is restricted in its range , never straying far from shores , in particular favoring rocky shorelines .
16  it has been suggested that this bird is seen mostly on coastal stretches which have some quieter embayments , such as jetty protected areas .
17   it forages in the intertidal zone , feeding on marine invertebrates , particularly molluscs such as mussels , limpets and chitons .
18  it will also take crabs , isopods and barnacles .
19  it hunts through the intertidal area , searching for food visually , often so close to the water's edge it has to fly up to avoid crashing surf .
20  it uses its strong bill to dislodge food and pry shells open .
21 the black oystercatcher is a territorial bird during the nesting season , defending a foraging and nesting area in one territory .
22  some pairs have been recorded staying together for many years .
23  nests are small bowls or depressions close to the shore in which small pebbles and shell fragments are tossed in with a sideward or backard flick of the bill .
24 around 2 to 3 eggs are laid in this nest , these are very hard and can even survive being submerged by a high tide or very high water levels .
25  incubation takes around 2628 days .
26  the chicks are capable of leaving the nest after one day , and will stay in the territory for a long time after fledging (40 days) .
27  the fledged juveniles will stay in the territory until the next breeding season .
28  if the parents migrate , that year's chicks will migrate with them; this happens more often in the north of the range .
29 == gallery == image: black oystercatcher .
