0 the black turnstone (arenaria melanocephala) is a species of small wading bird .
1  it is one of two species of turnstone in the genus arenaria , the ruddy turnstone (a .
2  interpres) being the other .
3  it is now classified in the sandpiper family , scolopacidae , but was formerly sometimes placed in the plover family , charadriidae .
4  it is native to the west coast of north america and breeds only in alaska .
5 ==description==it is 2225 centimeters long and weighs 100170 grams .
6  the black bill is 2027 millimeters long and slightly upturned .
7  the legs and feet are blackish-brown with a reddish tinge .
8  the bird is largely black and white in appearance .
9  breeding-plumaged adults have a black head and breast apart from a white spot between the eye and bill , a white stripe over the eye and white flecks on the sides of the breast .
10  the upperparts are blackish-brown with pale fringes to the wing-coverts and scapular feathers .
11  the belly and vent are white .
12  in flight it shows a white wingbar , white shoulder patch and white tail with a broad black band across it .
13  there is white from the lower back to the uppertail-coverts apart from a dark bar across the rump .
14 in winter the head and breast become largely dark brown with little white .
15  juveniles are similar to winter adults but browner with buff fringes to the wing-coverts and scapulars and a grey-brown tip to the tail .
16 the ruddy turnstone is similar but has rufous-brown markings on the upperparts and more white on the head and breast , particularly in breeding plumage .
17  it has narrower wings and a narrower white wingbar .
18  its legs are orange and brighter than those of the black turnstone though there can be some overlap .
19 the black turnstone has a variety of calls , especially a rattling trill which can be heard throughout the year .
20  this call is higher and less harsh than the similar call of the ruddy turnstone .
21   other calls include a loud , screeching alarm call and a soft , purring call uttered to young chicks .
22  displaying males produce a long series of staccato notes in flight as well as chirruping trills on the ground .
23 ==distribution==it breeds in western alaska from the alaska peninsula in the south to point hope in the north .
24  the bulk of the population nests in the yukon-kuskokwim delta .
25  it usually nests near the coast but in some areas it occurs further inland along the shores of rivers and lakes .
26  there are a handful of records from north-east siberia but there has been no sign of breeding there .
27  the world population is estimated at 95,000 birds with about 80,000 of these in the yukon-kuskokwim delta .
28 it winters on rocky shores along the pacific coast of north america from southern alaska southwards as far as north-west mexico where it occurs in baja california and sonora with a single record from nayarit .
29  it is very occasionally seen inland during spring and fall migration; there are a number of records from the salton sea in southern california and scattered sightings from inland us states including montana , wisconsin , nevada and arizona .
30  vagrant birds have been recorded from yukon and the northwest territories and there is one record from san cristbal island in the galpagos islands .
31 ==ecology==it feeds mainly on invertebrates , particularly crustaceans and mollusks in winter and insects during the breeding season .
32  seeds , eggs and carrion are also taken .
33  at the breeding grounds it mainly feeds in wet meadows with sedges .
34  in winter , its typical habitat is rocky coasts but it also feeds on beaches , mudflats and man-made structures such as jetties and breakwaters .
35  it uses its bill to turn over stones , algal mats and other objects to get at prey hidden beneath .
36 it arrives on its breeding ground from early may to early june with the males arriving first .
37  the birds often return to the same territory and pair with the same mate as previous years .
38  the nest is a scrape dug mainly by the male .
39  it is usually located amongst sedges or grasses or under willows .
40  four eggs are usually laid; they are olive or pale greenish with darker spots .
41  the eggs are incubated for 2124 days by both parents .
42  the young birds are precocial and are able to leave the nest and feed themselves soon after hatching .
43  they are able to fly well after 2534 days .
