0 the white-winged dove (zenaida asiatica) is a dove whose native range extends from the south-western united states through mexico , central america , and the caribbean .
1  in recent years with increasing urbanization and backyard feeding , it has expanded throughout texas into louisiana and coastal mississippi .
2  it has also been introduced to florida .
3 the white-winged dove is expanding outside of its historic range into kansas , arkansas , oklahoma , and northern new mexico .
4  the dove's range has even expanded drastically  northward into canada .
5  while the dove was introduced to alberta , it still remains a common spring and summer visitor in southern alberta and saskatchewan .
6 the rock singer stevie nicks , a native of arizona , where the bird is most common in the us , mentions the white-winged dove and its call prominently in her 1981 hit "edge of seventeen" .
7 ==description==white-winged doves are large , plump doves at {convert|29|cm|in|abbr=on} .
8  they are brownish-gray above and gray below , with a bold white wing patch that appears as a brilliant white crescent in flight and is also visible at rest .
9  adults have a patch of blue , featherless skin around each eye and a long , dark mark on the lower face .
10  their eyes are bright crimson .
11  the sexes are similar , but juveniles are more brown than adults .
12  they have a blue eye ring and their legs and feet are brighter pink/red .
13  young also have brown eyes .
14  males have a slight iridescent sheen on their heads .
15 ==behavior==the cooing calls is hoo , hoo , hoo-hoo .
16  a drawn-out "hoo-a" sound is used to tell others about the presence of a predator .
17  to impress females , males circle them with tail spread and wings raised .
18  males and females work together in raising the young .
19  while calling , the tail flares .
20  families and nestmates often stay together for life , perching and foraging together .
21 ==ecology==some populations of white-winged doves are migratory , wintering in mexico and central america .
22  they are year round inhabitants in texas .
23  san antonio , texas , had a year round population of over a million doves in 2001.  the white-winged dove inhabits scrub , woodlands , desert , urban , and cultivated areas .
24  it builds a flimsy stick nest in a tree of any kind and lays two cream-colored to white , unmarked eggs .
25  one chick often hatches earlier and stronger , and so will demand the most food from the parents .
26  a dove may nest as soon as 23 months after leaving the nest , making use of summer heat .
27  the dove will nest as long as there is food and enough warmth to keep fledglings warm .
28  in texas , they nest well into late august .
29 white-winged doves feed on a variety of seeds , grains , and fruits .
30  western white-winged doves (zenaida asiatica mearnsii) migrate into the sonoran desert to breed during the hottest time of the year because they feed on pollen and nectar , and later on the fruits and seeds of the saguaro cactus .
31  they also visit feeders , eating the food dropped on the ground .
32  cracked corn is a favorite of doves .
33  this gregarious species can be an agricultural pest , descending on grain crops in large flocks .
34  it is also a popular gamebird in areas of high population .
