0 the barn owl (tyto alba) is the most widely distributed species of owl , and one of the most widespread of all birds .
1  it is also referred to as the common barn owl , to distinguish it from other species in its family , tytonidae , which forms one of the two main lineages of living owls , the other being the typical owls (strigidae) .
2  the barn owl is found almost everywhere in the world except polar and desert regions , asia north of the himalayas , most of indonesia and some pacific islands .
3 phylogenetic evidence shows that there are at least three major lineages of barn owl , one in eurasia and africa , one in australasia and one in the new world , and some highly divergent taxa on islands .
4  some authorities further split the group , recognising up to five species , and further research needs to be done to clarify the position .
5  there is a considerable variation between the sizes and colour of the approximately 28 subspecies but most are between {convert|33|and|39|cm|0|abbr=on} in length with wingspans ranging from {convert|80|to|95|cm|0|abbr=on} .
6  the plumage on head and back is a mottled shade of grey or brown , the underparts vary from white to brown and are sometimes speckled with dark markings .
7  the face is characteristically heart-shaped and is white in most species .
8  this owl does not hoot , but utters an eerie , drawn-out shriek .
9 the barn owl is nocturnal over most of its range but in britain and some pacific islands , it also hunts by day .
10  barn owls specialise in hunting animals on the ground and nearly all of their food consists of small mammals which they locate by sound , their hearing being very acute .
11  they mate for life unless one of the pair gets killed , when a new pair bond may be formed .
12  breeding takes place at varying times of year according to locality , with a clutch , averaging about four eggs , being laid in a nest in a hollow tree , old building or fissure in a cliff .
13  the female does all the incubation , and she and the young chicks are reliant on the male for food .
14  when large numbers of small prey are readily available , barn owl populations can expand rapidly , and globally the bird is considered to be of least conservation concern .
15  some subspecies with restricted ranges are more threatened .
16 ==taxonomy and etymology==the barn owl was one of several species of bird first described in 1769 by the tyrolean physician and naturalist giovanni antonio scopoli in his  anni historico-naturales .
17  he gave it the scientific name strix alba .
18   as more species of owl were described , the genus name strix came to be used solely for the wood owls in the typical owl family strigidae , and the barn owl became tyto alba in the barn owl family tytonidae .
19  the name literally means "white owl", from the onomatopoeic ancient greek tyto () for an owl  compare english "hooter"  and latin alba , "white" .
20  the bird is known by many common names which refer to its appearance , call , habitat , or its eerie , silent flight: white owl , silver owl , demon owl , ghost owl , death owl , night owl , rat owl , church owl , cave owl , stone owl , monkey-faced owl , hissing owl , hobgoblin or hobby owl , dobby owl , white-breasted owl , golden owl , scritch owl , screech owl , straw owl , barnyard owl , and delicate owl .
21  "golden owl" might also refer to the related golden masked owl (t .
22  aurantia) .
23  "hissing owl" and , particularly in the us and in india , "screech owl", refers to the piercing calls of these birds .
24  the latter name is more correctly applied to a different group of birds , the screech-owls in the genus megascops .
25 the ashy-faced owl (t .
26  glaucops) was for some time included in t .
27  alba , and by some authors its populations from the lesser antilles still are .
28  based on dna evidence , knig , weick & becking (2009) recognised the american barn owl (t .
29  furcata) and the curaao barn owl (t .
30  bargei) as separate species .
31  they also proposed that t .
32  a .
33  delicatula should be split off as a separate species , to be known as the eastern barn owl , which would include the subspecies t .
34  d .
35  sumbaensis , t .
36  d .
37  meeki , t .
38  d .
39  crassirostris and t .
40  d .
41  interposita .
42  however , the international ornithological committee has doubts about this and states that the split of tyto delicatula from t .
43  alba "may need to be revisited" .
44  some island subspecies are occasionally treated as distinct species , a move which should await further research into barn owl phylogeography .
45  according to bruce in the handbook of birds of the world , volume 5: barn-owls to hummingbirds , "a review of the whole group [is] long overdue" .
46  molecular analysis of mitochondrial dna shows a separation of the species into two clades , an old world alba and a new world furcata , but this study did not include t .
47  a .
48  delicatula which the authors seem to have accepted as a separate species .
49  a high amount of genetic variation was also found between the indonesian t .
50  a .
51  stertens and other members of the alba clade .
52 the barn owl has a wider distribution than any other species of owl .
53  many subspecies have been proposed over the years but several are generally considered to be intergrades between more distinct populations .
54  twenty to thirty are usually recognised , varying mainly in body proportions , size and colour .
55  island forms are mostly smaller than mainland ones , and those inhabiting forests have darker plumage and shorter wings than those occurring in open grasslands .
56  barn owls range in colour from the almost beige-and-white nominate subspecies , erlangeri and niveicauda , to the nearly black-and-brown contempta .
