0 the snowy owl (bubo scandiacus) is a large , white owl of the typical owl family .
1  snowy owls are native to arctic regions in north america and eurasia .
2  younger snowy owls start with darker plumage , which turns lighter as they get older .
3  males are almost all white , while females have more flecks of gray plumage .
4 ==taxonomy==the snowy owl was one of the many bird species originally described by linnaeus in the landmark 1758 10th edition of his systema naturae , where it was given the binomial name of strix scandiaca .
5  until recently , it was regarded as the sole member of a distinct genus , as nyctea scandiaca , but mtdna cytochrome b sequence data (olsen et al .
6  2002) shows that it is very closely related to the horned owls in the genus bubo .
7  however , some authorities debate this classification , still preferring nyctea .
8 == description ==this yellow-eyed , black-beaked white bird is easily recognizable .
9  it is {convert|52||71|cm|in|abbr=on} long , with a {convert|125||150|cm|in|abbr=on} wingspan .
10  also , these owls can weigh anywhere from {convert|1.6|to|3|kg|lb|abbr=on} .
11  the average lifespan in the wild is 9.5 years .
12  it is one of the largest species of owl and , in north america , is on average the heaviest owl species .
13  the adult male is virtually pure white , but females and young birds have some dark spots; the young are heavily barred , and dark spotting may even predominate .
14  its thick plumage , heavily feathered taloned feet , and colouration render the snowy owl well-adapted for life north of the arctic circle .
15 snowy owl calls are varied , but the alarm call is a barking , almost quacking krek-krek; the female also has a softer mewling pyee-pyee or prek-prek .
16  the song is a deep repeated gahw .
17  they may also clap their beak in response to threats or annoyances .
18  while called clapping , it is believed this sound may actually be a clicking of the tongue , not the beak .
19 ==ecology==the snowy owl is typically found in the northern circumpolar region , where it makes its summer home north of latitude 60 north .
20  however , it is a particularly nomadic bird , and because population fluctuations in its prey species can force it to relocate , it has been known to breed at more southerly latitudes .
21  during the last glacial , there was a central europe bubo scandiacus gallicus , but no modern subspecies are recognized .
22 this species of owl nests on the ground , building a scrape on top of a mound or boulder .
23  a site with good visibility is chosen , such as the top of a mound with ready access to hunting areas and a lack of snow .
24  gravel bars and abandoned eagle nests may be used .
25  the female scrapes a small hollow before laying the eggs .
26  breeding occurs in may to june , and depending on the amount of prey available , clutch sizes range from 3 to 11 eggs , which are laid singly , approximately every other day over the course of several days .
27  hatching takes place approximately five weeks after laying , and the pure white young are cared for by both parents .
28  although the young hatch asynchronously , with the largest in the brood sometimes 10 to 15 times as heavy as the smallest , there is little sibling conflict and no evidence of siblicide .
29  both the male and the female defend the nest and their young from predators , sometimes by distraction displays .
30  males may mate with two females that may nest about a kilometre apart .
31  some individuals stay on the breeding grounds while others migrate .
32 ==range==snowy owls nest in the arctic tundra of the northernmost stretches of alaska , canada , and eurasia .
33  they winter south through canada and northern eurasia , with irruptions occurring further south in some years .
34  snowy owls are attracted to open areas like coastal dunes and prairies that appear somewhat similar to tundra .
35  they have been reported as far south as the american states of texas , georgia , the american gulf states , southernmost russia , and northern china .
36  in the late pleistocene the range expanded southward to bulgaria (80,00016,000 years , kozarnika cave , w bulgaria) .
37 in february 1886, a snowy owl landed on the rigging of the nova scotia steamship ulunda on the edge of the grand banks , over 600 kilometres from the nearest land .
38  it was captured and later preserved at the nova scotia museum .
39 between 1967 and 1975, snowy owls bred on the remote island of fetlar in the shetland isles north of scotland .
40  females summered as recently as 1993, but their status in the british isles is now that of a rare winter visitor to shetland , the outer hebrides and the cairngorms .
41 in january 2009, a snowy owl appeared in spring hill , tennessee , the first reported sighting in the state since 1987. also notable is the mass southern migration in the winter of 2011/2012, when thousands of snowy owls were spotted in various locations across the united states .
42  this was then followed by an even larger mass southern migration in 2013/2014 with the first snowy owls seen in florida for decades .
43 in december 2014, a snowy owl appeared in berkeley township , new jersey at island beach state park .
44 ==hunting and diet==this powerful bird relies primarily on lemmings and other small rodents for food during the breeding season , but at times of low prey density , or during the ptarmigan nesting period , they may switch to favoring juvenile ptarmigan .
45  they are opportunistic hunters and prey species may vary considerably , especially in winter .
46  they feed on a wide variety of small mammals such as meadow voles and deer mice , but will take advantage of larger prey , frequently following traplines to find food .
47  some of the larger mammal prey includes hares , muskrats , marmots , squirrels , rabbits , raccoons , prairie dogs , rats , moles and entrapped furbearers .
48  birds preyed upon include ptarmigan , other ducks , geese , shorebirds , pheasants , grouse , coots , grebes , gulls , songbirds , and even other raptors , including other owl species .
49  most of the owls' hunting is done in the "sit and wait" style; prey may be captured on the ground or in the air , or fish may be snatched off the surface of bodies of water using their sharp talons .
50  each bird must capture roughly 7 to 12 mice per day to meet its food requirement and can eat more than 1,600 lemmings per year .
51  unlike most owls that hunt at night , snowy owls are diurnal and hunt during the day and night .
52 snowy owls , like other carnivorous birds , swallow their small prey whole .
53  strong stomach juices digest the flesh , while the indigestible bones , teeth , fur , and feathers are compacted into oval pellets that the bird regurgitates 18 to 24 hours after feeding .
54  regurgitation often takes place at regular perches , where dozens of pellets may be found .
55  biologists frequently examine these pellets to determine the quantity and types of prey the birds have eaten .
56  when large prey are eaten in small pieces , pellets will not be produced .
57 ==natural threats==although snowy owls have few predators , the adults are very watchful and are equipped to defend against any kind of threat towards them or their offspring .
58  during the nesting season , the owls regularly defend their nests against arctic foxes , corvids and swift-flying jaegers; as well as dogs , gray wolves and avian predators .
59  males defend the nest by standing guard nearby while the female incubates the eggs and broods the young .
60  both genders attack approaching predators , dive-bombing them and engaging in distraction displays to draw the predator away from a nest .
61 they also compete directly for lemmings and other prey with several predators , including rough-legged hawks , golden eagles , peregrine falcons , gyrfalcons , jaegers , glaucous gulls , short-eared owls , great horned owls , eurasian eagle owls , common ravens , wolves , arctic foxes , and ermine .
62  they are normally dominant over other raptors although may (sometimes fatally) lose in conflicts to large raptors such as other bubo owls , golden eagles and the smaller but much faster peregrine falcons .
63  some species nesting near snowy owl nests , such as the snow goose , seem to benefit from the incidental protection of snowy owls that drive competing predators out of the area .
