0 the northern pygmy owl (glaucidium gnoma), known as northern pygmy-owl in north america , is a small owl native to north and central america .
1 ==taxonomy==some experts consider this bird a superspecies with the mountain pygmy owl .
2    the american ornithologists' union , the authority for the north american region , does not recognize this split , so the populations are still considered conspecific .
3   clear differences in the territorial calls by males are the basis for a proposed split , with birds in the high elevations of arizona and mexico giving a two-note call while their more northerly congeners give a repeated single-note call .
4   results from dna sequence comparisons of cytochrome-b have been weak and inconclusive despite being referenced repeatedly as a justification for taxonomic splitting .
5  some taxonomists split the northern pygmy owl from the mountain form , in which case the latter takes the nominate form , and the former takes the g .
6  calfornicum specific name .
7 ===subspecies===there are seven recognized subspecies:==description==adults are 1517 cm in overall length (nearly 6 inches) and are gray , brownish-gray or rufous in colour .
8    this owl has a round white spotted head , weakly defined facial disc , and dark upper breast , wings and tail , the latter quite long compared to other owls .
9   the eyes are yellow and the bill is yellowish-green .
10   the bird has two black nape spots outlined in white on the back of its head , which look like eyes .
11   the mid to lower breast is white with darker vertical streaking .
12   legs are feathered down to the four well-armed toes on each foot .
13 ==distribution and habitat==the northern pygmy owl is native to canada , the united states , mexico , guatemala and honduras .
14  their habitat includes temperate , subtropical and tropical moist forest , savanna , and wetlands .
15 in oregon and washington they are known to nest and forage in the center of dense , continuous forests , near streams .
16  an example of their habitat is forest park in portland , oregon .
17  their breeding habitat includes open to semi-open woodlands of foothills and mountains in western north america .
18 ==behavior==males will regularly perch at the top of the tallest available conifer trees to issue their territorial call , making them somewhat ventriloquistic in sloped landscapes , and causing distress and confusion among observers on the ground hoping to get a glimpse .
19  they are incredibly hard to spot because of their size and color .
20 ===breeding===they usually nest in a tree cavity and will often use old woodpecker holes .
21  the female lays 27 eggs , typically 46.  nest tree species may include douglas fir , western redcedar , western hemlock and red alder .
22  early in the breeding cycle males establish and defend a territory of perhaps 250 hectares (about 1 sq .
23  mi .
24 ) .
25 during the breeding cycle the female incubates the eggs , broods the young and guards the nest .
26   the male hunts , making food deliveries approximately every 2 hours .
27   the male must feed his mate , the young (typically 5) and himself .
28   the male hunts from dawn to dusk as the young near fledging , and during the first weeks after they leave the nest .
29 the young leave the nest (fledge) by making an initial flight that may be a short hop to a nearby branch , or an explosive burst into an adjacent tree where they land by grasping whatever branch is first contacted , sometimes clinging upside-down .
30   owls at this stage are sometimes called "branchers" for their clinging , dangling and climbing behaviors .
31   the second day after fledging , the young gradually climb and fly upward into the forest canopy , where they spend their first few weeks , at times perched "shoulder-to-shoulder" with their siblings , begging for food .
32 despite many statements in popular literature , no reliable information exists on the seasonal movements of this species .
33   it is not known whether these pygmy-owls maintain the same territory or same mate year to year , though these questions are being investigated .
34   dispersal of young and influences on their mortality are also poorly known , though barred owls and spotted owls are known to prey on pygmy owls .
35 ===feeding===pygmy owls are purportedly "sit-and-wait" predators , though they in fact hunt somewhat actively , moving from perch to perch with short flights , and pursuing prey at all levels of forest structure .
36   they swoop down on prey; they may also catch insects in flight .
37   they eat small mammals , birds and large insects , and may take a variety of other vertebrates and invertebrates .
38   mountain pygmy owls occasionally take prey species the same size or larger than themselves (e .
39 g .
40  california quail); however , small to medium-sized birds and small mammals are the norm .
41  they've been observed eating wilson's warblers .
42  these owls are diurnal , and also active at dawn and dusk .
