0 the chimney swift (chaetura pelagica) is a bird belonging to the swift family apodidae .
1  a member of the genus chaetura , it is closely related to both the vaux's swift and the chapman's swift; in the past , the three were sometimes considered to be conspecific .
2  it has no subspecies .
3  the chimney swift is a medium-sized , sooty gray bird with very long , slender wings and very short legs .
4  like all swifts , it is incapable of perching , and can only cling vertically to surfaces .
5 the chimney swift feeds primarily on flying insects , but also on airborne spiders .
6  it generally mates for life .
7  it builds a bracket nest of twigs and saliva stuck to a vertical surface , which is almost always a human-built structure , typically a chimney .
8  the female lays 45 white eggs .
9  the altricial young hatch after 19 days and fledge a month later .
10  the average chimney swift lives 4.6 years .
11 ==taxonomy and systematics==when he first described the chimney swift in 1758, carl linnaeus named it hirundo pelagica , believing it to be a swallow .
12  this misconception continued well into the 1800s , with ornithologists calling it "american swallow" (e .
13 g .
14  mark catesby) or "chimney swallow" (e .
15 g .
16  john james audubon) .
17  in 1825, james francis stephens moved this and other small , short-tailed new world swifts to the genus chaetura , where it has since remained , although some authorities in the 1800s assigned it to a variety of now obsolete genera .
18  it has no subspecies .
19  the chimney swift's closest relative is the vaux's swift .
20  scientists believe that the two species evolved from a common ancestor that was forced to north america's southeastern and southwestern corners by glacial advances .
21  separated for millennia by vast ice sheets , the survivors evolved into two species which are still separated by a wide gap across the continent's midsection .
22  it is also closely related to the chapman's swift; in the past , the three were sometimes treated as a single species .
23 the chimney swift's genus name , chaetura , is a combination of two greek words: chaite , which means "bristle" or "spine", and oura which means "tail" .
24  this is an apt description of the bird's tail , as the shafts of all ten tail feathers (rectrices) end in sharp , protruding points .
25  the specific name pelagica is derived from the greek word pelagikos , which means "of the sea" .
26  this is thought to be a reference to its nomadic lifestyle rather than to any reference to the sea , a theory strengthened by the later assignment of the specific name pelasgia (after the nomadic pelasgi tribe of ancient greece) to the same species by other ornithologists .
27  its common name refers to its preferred nesting site and its speedy flight .
28 ==description==this is a medium-sized swift , measuring from {convert|12|to|15|cm|in|abbr=on} in length ,{#tag:ref|by convention , length is measured from the tip of the bill to the tip of the tail on a dead bird (or skin) laid on its back .
29 |group="nb"} with a wingspan of {convert|27|to|30|cm|in|abbr=on} and a weight ranging from {convert|17|to|30|g|oz|abbr=on} .
30  the sexes are identical in plumage , though males average slightly heavier than females .
31  the adult's plumage is a dark sooty olive above and grayish brown below , with a slightly paler rump and uppertail covert feathers , and a significantly paler throat .
32  its upperparts are the most uniformly colored of all the chaetura swifts , showing little contrast between back and rump .
33  its beak is black , as are its feet and legs .
34  its iris is dark brown .
35  juvenal plumage (that held by juvenile birds) is very similar to that of adults , but with whitish tips to the outer webs of the secondaries and tertials .
36 the chimney swift's wings are slender , curved and long , extending as much as {convert|1.5|in|cm|abbr=on} beyond the bird's tail when folded .
37  its wingtips are pointed , which helps to decrease air turbulence (and therefore drag) during flight .
38  its humerus (the bone in the inner part of the wing) is quite short , while the bones farther out (more distally) along the wing are elongated , a combination which allows the bird to flap very quickly .
39  in flight , it holds its wings stiffly , alternating between rapid , quivering flaps and longer glides .
40  its flight profile is widely described as a "cigar with wings"a description first used by roger tory peterson .
41  although the bird often appears to beat its wings asynchronously during flight , photographic and stroboscopic studies have shown that it beats them in unison .
42  the illusion that it does otherwise is heightened by its very fast and highly erratic flight , with many rapid changes of direction .
43 the legs of the chimney swift , like those of all swifts , are very short .
44  its feet are small but strong , with very short toes that are tipped with sharp , curved claws .
45  the toes are anisodactylthree forward , one backlike those of most birds , but the chimney swift can swivel its back toe (its hallux) forward to help it get a better grip .
46  unlike the legs and feet of most birds , those of the chimney swift have no scales; instead , they are covered with smooth skin .
47 its tail is short and square , measuring only {convert|1.90||2.15|in|cm|abbr=on} in length .
48  all ten of its tail feathers have shafts which extend as much as {convert|0.5|in|cm|abbr=on} beyond the vanes , ending in sharp , stiff points .
49  these help the bird to prop itself against vertical surfaces .
50 the chimney swift has large , deep set eyes .
51  these are protected by small patches of coarse , black , bristly feathers , which are located in front of each eye .
52  the swift can change the angle of these feathers , which may help to reduce glare .
53  it is far-sighted and , like some birds of prey , this swift is bifoveal: each eye having both a temporal and a central fovea .
54 {#tag:ref|for more information , see anatomy of the eye section in the bird vision article|group="nb"|name=""} these are small depressions in the retina where visual acuity is highest , and help to make its vision especially acute .
55  like most vertebrates , it is able to focus both eyes at once; however , it is also able to focus a single eye independently .
56 its bill is very small , with a culmen that measures a mere {convert|5|mm|in|abbr=on} in length .
57  however , its gape is huge , extending back below its eyes , and allowing the bird to open its mouth very widely .
58  unlike many insectivorous birds , it lacks rictal bristles at the base of the beak .
59 ===similar species===the chimney swift looks very much like the closely related vaux's swift , but is slightly larger , with relatively longer wings and tail , slower wingbeats and a greater tendency to soar .
60  it tends to be darker on the breast and rump than the vaux's swift , though there is some overlap in plumage coloring .
61  it can be as much as 30 percent heavier than the vaux's swift , and its wings , which are proportionately narrower , show a pronounced bulge in the inner secondaries .
62  the chimney swift is smaller , paler and shorter tailed than the black swift .
63  in central america , it is most similar to the chapman's swift , but it is paler (matte olive rather than glossy black) and has a stronger contrast between its pale throat and the rest of its underparts than does the more uniformly colored chapman's swift .
64 ==range and habitat==a widespread breeding visitor to much of the eastern half of the united states and the southern reaches of eastern canada , the chimney swift migrates to south america for the winter .
65  it is a rare summer visitor to the western u .
66 s , and has been recorded as a vagrant in anguilla , barbados , greenland , jamaica , portugal , the united kingdom and the u.s.
68  virgin islands .
69  it is found over open country , savanna , wooded slopes and humid forests .
70 the chimney swift's wintering grounds were only discovered in 1944, when bands from birds banded (ringed) in north america were recovered in peru .
71  an indigenous peruvian had been wearing the bands as a necklace .
72 ==behavior==the chimney swift is a gregarious species , and is seldom seen alone .
73  it generally hunts in groups of two or three , migrates in loose flocks of 620, and (once the breeding season is over) sleeps in huge communal roosts of hundreds or thousands of birds .
74  like all swifts , it is a superb aerialist , and only rarely seen at rest .
75  it drinks on the wing , skimming the surface of the water with its beak .
76  it also bathes on the wing , gliding above the surface of a body of water , briefly smacking its breast into the water , then flying off again , shaking its feathers as it goes .
77  it is incapable of perching upright like most birds do; instead , it clings to vertical surfaces .
78  if it is disturbed while at rest , the chimney swift will clap its wings loudly once or twice against its body; it does this either in place , or while dropping down several feet to a lower location .
79  this behavior can result in a loud "thundering" sound if large roosts of the birds are disturbed .
80  the sound is thought to be the bird's way of scaring away potential predators .
81 ===feeding===like all swifts , the chimney swift forages on the wing .
82  studies have shown that 95 percent of its food items are flying insects , including various species of flies , ants , wasps , bees , whiteflies , aphids , scale insects , stoneflies and mayflies .
83  it also eats airborne spiders drifting on their threads .
84  it is an important predator of pest species such as the red imported fire ant and the clover root curculio .
85  researchers estimate that a pair of adults provisioning a nest with three youngsters consume the weight equivalent of at least 50006000 housefly-sized insects per day .
86 during the breeding season , at least half of the chimney swift's forays occur within {convert|0.5|km|mi|abbr=on} of its nest; however , it ranges up to {convert|6|km|mi|abbr=on} away .
87  while most of its food is seized following aerial pursuit , some is gleaned from the foliage of trees; the bird hovers near the ends of branches or drops through upper canopy levels .
88  the chimney swift generally flies quite high , though it descends during cold or rainy weather .
89  when feeding , it regularly occurs in small groups , and sometimes hunts with swallows , particularly barn swallows and purple martins; in mixed-species flocks , it is typically among the lower fliers .
90  there is at least one record of a chimney swift attempting to steal a dragonfly from a purple martin , and it has been observed chasing other purple martins .
91  in general , it is a diurnal feeder which remains active into early evening .
92  however , there are records , particularly during migration periods , of chimney swifts feeding well after dark over brightly lit buildings .
93 the species shows two weight peaks each year: one at the start of the breeding season , and a higher one shortly before it begins its migration south in the autumn .
94  its lowest weights are typically recorded during the breeding season , when it also begins a complete molt of its plumage .
95  the chimney swift's weight gain before migration is smaller than that of some passerines , suggesting that it must refuel en route at various stopover points .
96 ===breeding===the chimney swift is a monogamous breeder which normally mates for life , though a small percentage of birds change partners .
97  pairs perform display flights together , gliding with their wings upraised in a steep "v", and sometimes rocking from side to side .
98  breeding birds arrive as early as mid march in the southern u.s.
100 , and as late as mid-may in the canadian provinces .
101 before the arrival of european colonists into north america , the chimney swift nested in hollow trees; now , it uses human-built structures almost exclusively .
102  while the occasional nest is still built in a hollow tree (or , exceptionally , in an abandoned woodpecker nest), most are now found in chimneys , with smaller numbers in airshafts , the dark corners of lightly used buildings , cisterns , or wells .
103  the nest is a shallow bracket made of sticks , which the birds gather in flight , breaking them off trees .
104  the sticks are glued together (and the nest to a vertical surface) with copious amounts of the bird's saliva .
105  during the breeding season , each adult's salivary glands more than double in size , from {convert|7|x|2|mm|in|abbr=on} in the non-breeding season to {convert|14|x|5|mm|abbr=on} during the breeding season .
106 unlike some swift species , which mate in flight , chimney swifts mate while clinging to a vertical surface near their nest .
107  they copulate daily , until the clutch is complete .
108  the female typically lays 45 eggs , though clutch sizes range from 2 to 7. the eggs , which are long and elliptical in shape , are moderately glossy , smooth and white , and measure {convert|20|x|13|mm|in|abbr=on} .
109  each weighs nearly 10 percent of the female's body weight .
110  incubated by both parents , the eggs hatch after 19 days .
111  baby chimney swifts are altricialnaked , blind and helpless when they hatch .
112  fledglings leave the nest after a month .
113 the average chimney swift's life span is 4.6 years , but one is known to have lived more than 14 years .
114  it was originally banded as an adult , and was recaptured in another banding operation some 12.5 years later .
115 ===predators and parasites===mississippi kites , peregrine falcons and merlins are raptors that are known to take adult chimney swifts in flight , being among the select few avian hunters fast enough to overtake the appropriately named swift on the wing .
116  eastern screech-owls have been seen attacking colonies , as have non-avian predators including eastern rat snakes , northern raccoons and tree squirrels .
117  these are most likely to take nestlings but may take some nesting adults as well .
118  when disturbed by potential predators (including humans) at the colony , adult chimney swifts slap their wings together after arching back and taking flight , making a very loud noise known either as "booming" or "thunder noises" .
119  when disturbed , nestlings make a loud , raspy raah , raah , raah sound .
120  both sounds seem designed to startle potential predators .
121 the chimney swift carries a number of internal and external parasites .
122  it is the type host for the nematode species aproctella nuda , the feather mite species euchineustathia tricapitosetosa , and the biting lice species  dennyus dubius .
123  its nest is known to host the hemiptera species cimexopsis nyctali , which is similar to the bedbug and can (on rare occasions) become a pest species in houses .
124 ===voice===the chimney swift has a twittering call , consisting of a rapid series of hard , high-pitched chirps .
125  it sometimes gives single chirps .
126 ==conservation status==in 2010, the international union for the conservation of nature changed the chimney swift's status from least concern to near threatened .
127  although the global population is estimated at 15 million , it has declined precipitously across the majority of its range .
128  the causes of population declines are largely unclear , but may be related to the alteration of the insect community due to pesticide use in the early half of the 20th century .
129  in canada , they were listed as threatened by cosewic for several years with a likely future listing as a schedule 1 species of the species at risk act .
130  in the u.s.
132 , the chimney swift is protected by the migratory bird treaty act of 1918. neither birds nor nests can be removed from chimneys without a federally-issued permit .
133 populations may have increased historically with the introduction of chimneys to north america by european settlers , providing plentiful nesting opportunities .
134 after sudden temperature drops , the chimney swift sometimes hunts low over concrete roads (presumably following insect prey drawn to the warmer road), where collisions with vehicles become more likely .
135  severe storms , such as hurricanes , encountered during migration can seriously impact the chimney's swift's survival rates .
136  swifts caught up in 2005's hurricane wilma were swept as far north as atlantic canada and western europe .
137  more than 700 were found dead .
138  the following year , roost counts in the province of quebec , canada showed a decrease of 62 percent , and the overall population in the province was halved .
139 ==history of observation==in 1899, mary day of new jersey observed a pair of chimney swifts nesting in a chimney , and noted the incubation period was 19 days .
140  the first detailed study of chimney swifts began in 1915 by self-taught ornithologist althea sherman in iowa .
141  she commissioned a 28 foot tall tower , of a similar design to a chimney , with ladders and peep holes installed to ease observation .
142  chimney swifts nested in her tower , and for over fifteen years , she meticulously recorded her observations , filling over 400 pages .
143  sherman remarked that although the tower had been designed with a limited knowledge of the nesting behaviour of chimney swifts , after many years of observation she believed that the original design was ideal .
