0 the acorn woodpecker (melanerpes formicivorus) is a medium-sized woodpecker , {convert|21|cm|in|abbr=on} long , with an average weight of {convert|85|g|oz|abbr=on} .
1 ==description==the adult acorn woodpecker has a brownish-black head , back , wings and tail , white forehead , throat , belly and rump .
2  the eyes are white .
3  there is a small part on the small of their backs where there are some green feathers .
4  the adult male has a red cap starting at the forehead , whereas females have a black area between the forehead and the cap .
5  the white neck , throat , and forehead patches are distinctive identifiers .
6  when flying , they take a few flaps of their wings and drop a foot or so .
7  white circles on their wings are visible when in flight .
8  acorn woodpeckers have a call that is almost like they are laughing .
9 ==breeding communities==the breeding habitat is forested areas with oaks in the hills of coastal areas and foothills of california and the southwestern united states south to colombia .
10  this species may occur at low elevations in the north of its range , but rarely below {convert|1000|m|ft|abbr=on} in central america , and it breeds up to the timberline .
11  the breeding pair excavate a nest in a large cavity in a dead tree or a dead part of a tree .
12  a group of adults may participate in nesting activities: field studies have shown that breeding groups range from monogamous pairs to breeding collectives of seven males and three females , plus up to 10 nonbreeding helpers .
13  young from a single brood have been found with multiple paternity .
14 ==food and homes==acorn woodpeckers , as their name implies , depend heavily on acorns for food .
15  in some parts of their range (e .
16 g .
17 , california), the woodpeckers create granaries or "acorn trees" by drilling holes in dead trees , dead branches , telephone poles , and wooden buildings .
18  the woodpeckers then collect acorns and find a hole that is just the right size for the acorn .
19  as acorns dry out , they are moved to smaller holes and granary maintenance requires a significant amount of the bird's time .
20  they also feed on insects , sap , and fruit .
21 ==defense and storing==the acorns are visible , and the group defends the tree against potential cache robbers like steller's jays and western scrub jays .
22  acorns are such an important resource to the california populations that acorn woodpeckers may nest in the fall to take advantage of the fall acorn crop , a rare behavior in birds .
23  acorn woodpeckers can also be seen sallying from tree limbs to catch insects , eating fruit and seeds , and drilling holes to drink sap .
24  the acorn woodpecker will use any human-made structures to store acorns , drilling holes into fence posts , utility poles , buildings , and even automobile radiators .
25  occasionally the woodpecker will put acorns into places where it cannot get them out .
26  woodpeckers put {convert|220|kg|lb|abbr=on} of acorns into a wooden water tank in arizona .
27  in parts of its range the acorn woodpecker does not construct a "granary tree", but instead stores acorns in natural holes and cracks in bark .
28  if the stores are eaten , the woodpecker will move to another area , even going from arizona to mexico to spend the winter .
29 ==breeding behavior==acorn woodpeckers practice cooperative breeding , which is a relatively rare evolutionary trait that is thought to occur in only nine percent of bird species .
30  cooperative breeding is defined as more than two birds taking care of nestlings in the nest .
31  with the acorn woodpecker , cooperative breeding occurs in two ways: coalitions and family groups .
32  coalitions of adult acorn woodpeckers nest together , localizing to storage granaries .
33  additionally , adult offspring often stay in their parents' nest and help raise the next generation of woodpeckers .
34  it is generally believed that limited territories drive cooperative breeding behavior in birds , and in the case of the acorn woodpecker , this limited territory is the acorn storage granary .
35 as mentioned , adult acorn woodpeckers live together in "coalitions", which consist of up to seven co-breeding males and up to three joint-nesting females; however , most nests are made up of only three males and two females .
36  nesting groups can also contain up to ten offspring helpers .
37  interestingly , these breeding coalitions are typically closely related .
38  the males are often brothers , and the females are usually sisters .
39  inbreeding is rare , however , meaning that co-breeders of the opposite sex are almost never related .
40 in groups with more than one breeding female , the females put their eggs into a single nest cavity .
41  a female usually destroys any eggs in the nest before she starts to lay .
42  once all the females start to lay , they stop removing eggs .
43 ==threats and degradation==acorn woodpeckers , like many other species , are threatened by habitat loss and degradation .
44  competition for nest cavities by non-native species is an ongoing threat in urbanized areas .
45  conservation of this species is dependent on the maintenance of functional ecosystems that provide the full range of resources upon which the species depends .
46  these include mature forests with oaks capable of producing large mast crops and places for the woodpeckers to nest , roost , and store mast .
47  residents are encouraged to preserve mature oak and pine-oak stands of trees and to provide dead limbs and snags for nesting , roosting , and granary sites to help preserve the acorn woodpecker's population .
48 ==popular culture==walter lantz is believed to have patterned the call of his cartoon character woody woodpecker on that of the acorn woodpecker , while patterning his appearance on that of the pileated woodpecker which has a prominent crest .
