0 the black-headed grosbeak (pheucticus melanocephalus) is a medium-size seed-eating bird in the same family as the northern cardinal , the cardinalidae .
1  it is sometimes considered conspecific with the rose-breasted grosbeak (p .
2  ludovicianus) with which it hybridises on the american great plains .
3 the 19 cm (7.5 in) long , 47 g (1.7 oz) black-headed grosbeak is a migratory bird , with nesting grounds from southwestern british columbia , through the western half of the united states , into central mexico .
4  it occurs as an vagrant further south in central america .
5 descriptionthe black-headed grosbeak's approximate length is 1819 cm (7.17.5 in); it is similar in size to a common starling .
6  as per its name , the male has a black head , and black wings and tail with prominent white patches .
7  its breast is dark to tawny orange in color , and its belly is yellow .
8  the female has a brown head , neck and back with sparrow-like black streaks .
9  she also has white streaks down the middle of her head , over her eyes and on her cheeks .
10  her breast is white and wings and tail are grayish-brown with two white wing bars and yellowish wing edges .
11 habitatthe black-headed grosbeak prefers to live in deciduous and mixed wooded areas .
12  it likes to be in areas where there are large trees as well as thick bushes , such as patches of broadleaved trees and shrubs within conifer forests , including streamside corridors , river bottoms , lakeshores , wetlands , and suburban areas .
13 nestingfemales build nests among the dense foliage on an outer branch of tall broadleaved trees or shrubs , 335 ft (0.9110.67 m) above ground .
14  they will occasionally build in dense shrubs such as blackberry .
15  the nest is in the shape of an open saucer , made of fine grass , rootlets twigs , bark and conifer needles .
16  it is often lined with rootlets , hair , and fine plant material .
17  the female lays two to five pale green , blue or gray eggs that are spotted with reddish and dark brown .
18  the eggs are incubated by the male and female for 1214 days .
19  after the eggs have hatched the fledglings leave the nest in about 11 or 12 days , however they are unable to fly for another two weeks .
20  the young are fed by both adults .
21  the black-headed grosbeak's monogamy is under study , but pair bonds generally last for only one breeding season .
22  they typically have one brood per season , though double broods have been documented in foothills of the sacramento valley in california .
23 voicephotograph of femalethe female of this species looks similar to the female of the rose-breasted grosbeak and is best separated on geographical range .
24 the grosbeak's song is a rich warble that is similar to that of an american robin but more fluent , faster , softer , sweeter and mellow with rising and falling passages that make the song much longer than the robin's .
25  the note is a sharp ik or eek .
26  both the male and female sing , but have different songs .
27 the black-headed grosbeak eats pine and other seeds , berries and insects , spiders and fruit .
28  during the summer months it mostly eats spiders , snails and insects .
29  it is one of the few birds that can safely eat the poisonous monarch butterfly .
30  in their wintering grounds , this grosbeak consumes many monarchs and many seeds .
31  it will come to bird feeders for sunflower and other types of seed , and fruit .
32 range and migrationblack-headed grosbeaks range from the pacific coast to the middle of the us great plains and from south western canada to the mountains of mexico .
33  us and canadian birds are highly migratory , wintering in mexico .
34  in the great plains the range of the black-headed grosbeak and the rose-breasted grosbeak overlap and have interbred somewhat .
35  after the breeding season , they tend to seek out berry-rich areas .
36  they migrate south early in the fall and return to the north late in the spring and have been known to do so in flocks .
37 they also like to live in the desert in arizona .
38 behaviorblack-headed grosbeaks frequently sing from prominent perches .
39  both the male and female sing , but have different songs , and both are known to sing from the nest while incubating .
40  when trying to court a female , males fly with their wings and tails spread .
41  they forage in the foliage , on the ground or in low vegetation and are prominent berry eaters .
