0 the lark bunting (calamospiza melanocorys) is a medium-sized american sparrow native to central and western north america .
1 taxonomythe lark bunting is monotypic , the only member of the genus calamospiza , and is not closely related to any other genera .
2  it was first described by j .
3  k .
4  townsend in 1837, from a specimen collected on a trip he took with thomas nuttall , under the name fringilla bicolor .
5  this is a preoccupied name , so leonhard hess stejneger renamed the species in 1885 calamospiza melanocorys .
6  by then , the lark bunting had already been given its own genus , the one it is still placed in , by charles lucien bonaparte in 1838.[2]descriptionlark buntings are small songbirds , with a short , thick , bluish bill .
7  there is a large patch of white on the wings and they have a relatively short tail with white tips at the end of the feathers .
8  breeding males have an all black body with a large white patch on the upper part of the wing .
9  nonbreeding males and females look similar and are grayish brown with white stripes .
10 [3]distribution and habitatthe lark bunting is the most prevalent of the passerine species found in the grasslands of north america .
11  their breeding habitat is prairie regions in central canada and the mid-western united states .
12  these birds migrate in flocks to winter southern texas , arizona and the high plateau of northern mexico in the fall .
13 [2]behaviorbreedingthe birds typically nest in dispersed colonies .
14  males fly up over their territory and sing while descending to declare ownership of a nesting territory .
15  the song consists of a mix of whistles and trills .
16  the call is a soft hoo .
17 the nest is an open cup on the ground in a grassy area .
18 [2]while the lark buntings are socially monogamous , there is extensive extra-pair mating , observed through extra-pair paternity .
19  in songbirds , it is suggested that social monogamy exists because of limited opportunities for polygyny .
20  as expected , there is considerable aggression between males and between females , competing for mates .
21  many males are unable to find a social mate , which can be attributed to male-biased breeding sex ratio , social monogamy , and the frequency of extra-pair paternity .
22 [4] acquisition of a social mate is an essential element of a males fitness , thus social mating success plays a significant role in variable selection of male traits .
23 [5]sexual selection in lark buntings is particularly interesting , as female mate choice is radically different from year to year .
24  in different years , females show preference based on males black coloring , size of wing patch , size of beak , as well as other characteristics .
25 [4] the consequence of this extreme variation of female choice from year to year is the maintenance of genetic variation in several different male sexual ornaments .
26  a study measures body color , proportion of black versus brown feathers on rump and rest of body , wing patch size , wing patch color , body size , beak size , and residual mass , in order to evaluate the multiple characteristics potentially selected on by females .
27  social pairing success was measured as well as total annual fitness , finding female choice as the primary factor .
28  plasticity in female choice is favored for adapting to changes in ecological and social environments .
29 [6]temporal flexibility in female choice parallels the phenomenon seen in darwin's finches , with different beak sizes and shapes favored for changing food supply over years , defined as temporal selection in the context of natural selection .
30  in lark buntings , a trait that is positively selected upon one year was likely negatively selected against in a previous year .
31  these dramatic fluctuations highlight the importance of looking at sexual selection patterns over an extended period of time before drawing any conclusions .
32  by looking at short time periods , however , it possible to identify female preference annually , however it is difficult to make any extrapolations for these assessments .
33 [5] an additional consequence of variation of female choice annually is the potential elimination of phenotypic selection for male trait exaggeration .
34 males are characterized as weakly territorial prior to mating , however , there has been some evidence on territory features correlating with female settlement , thus female reproductive success .
35  studies have shown that shade is an important resource for female reproductive success .
36 [7] as a fitness-limiting feature , it would be reasonable to expect this could account for any existing tendencies for males being territorial .
37  however , levels of male aggression do not change , which lends to the conclusion that female choice corresponds with changes in fitness-indicator traits .
38  extra-pair mating has been corresponded with nesting site quality , adding further characterization to male aggression .
39 [8] many studies have showed territory characteristics as important for mate acquisition , however a recent study shows evidence of its decreased role comparatively to female choice .
40 feedinglark buntings primarily forage on the ground , mainly eating insects in summer and seeds in winter; they sometimes take short flights in pursuit of insects .
41  outside of the nesting season , they often feed in flocks .
42 state birdthe lark bunting is the state bird of colorado .
