0 the blue grosbeak (passerina caerulea , formerly guiraca caerulea)[3], is a medium-sized seed-eating bird in the same family as the northern cardinal , "tropical" or new world buntings , and "cardinal-grosbeaks" or new world grosbeaks .
1 the male blue grosbeak is a beautiful bird , being almost entirely deep blue .
2  the female is mostly brown .
3  both sexes are distinguished by their large , deep bill and double wing bars .
4  these features , as well as the grosbeak's relatively larger size , distinguish this species from the indigo bunting .
5  length can range from 14 to 19 cm (5.5 to 7.5 in) and wingspan is from 26 to 29 cm (10 to 11 in) .
6 [2][3] body mass is typically from 26 to 31.5 g (0.92 to 1.11 oz) .
7 [4]this is a migratory bird , with nesting grounds across most of the southern half of the united states and much of northern mexico , migrating south to central america and in very small numbers to northern south america; the southernmost record comes from eastern ecuador .
8  it eats mostly insects , but it will also eat snails , spiders , seeds , grains , and wild fruits .
9  the blue grosbeak forages on the ground and in shrubs and trees .
10 habitatthis species is found in partly open habitat with scattered trees , riparian woodland , scrub , thickets , cultivated lands , woodland edges , overgrown fields , or hedgerows .
11  it nests in a low tree or bush or a tangle of vegetation , usually about 13 m (3.39.8 ft) above ground , often at the edge of an open area .
12 a large , vibrantly blue bunting with an enormous silver bill and chestnut wingbars , the male blue grosbeak sings a rich , warbling song from trees and roadside wires .
13  he and his cinnamon-colored mate often raise two broods of nestlings in a single breeding season .
14  a bird of shrubby habitats , these richly colored birds can be hard to spot unless you hear them singing first .
15  they are widespread but not abundant across the southern u.s.
17 , and are expanding their range .
18 size & shapethe blue grosbeak is a stocky songbird with a very large , triangular bill that seems to cover the entire front of its face , from throat to forehead .
19 color patternadult males are deep , rich blue with a tiny black mask in front of the eyes , chestnut wingbars , and a black-and-silver beak .
20  females are primarily rich cinnamon-brown .
21  the color is richer on the head , paler on the underparts; their tails are bluish .
22  both sexes have two wingbars; the upper is chestnut and the lower is grayish to buffy .
23  immature blue grosbeaks tend to a rich , dark chestnut brown , with chestnut wingbars .
24 behaviorblue grosbeaks are unobtrusive despite their bright colors , although in summer males frequently sing their pleasant , rich , warbling songs .
25  often they sing while perched at high points in the shrubs and small trees of their generally open or shrubby habitats .
26  listen for their loud , almost metallic chink call .
27  also watch for this species odd habit of twitching its tail sideways .
28 habitatblue grosbeaks are characteristic species of old fields beginning to grow back into woodland .
29  they breed in areas covered in a mix of grass , forbs , and shrubs , with usually a few taller trees .
30  in more-arid areas , they often use the shrubby growth along watercourses .
