0 the lazuli bunting (passerina amoena) is a north american songbird named for the gemstone lapis lazuli .
1 the male is easily recognized by its bright blue head and back (lighter than the closely related indigo bunting), its conspicuous white wingbars , and its light rusty breast and white belly .
2  the color pattern may suggest the eastern and western bluebirds , but the smaller size (1314 cm or 55.5 inches long), wingbars , and short and conical bunting bill quickly distinguish it .
3  the female is brown , grayer above and warmer underneath , told from the female indigo bunting by two thin and pale wingbars and other plumage details .
4 the song is a high , rapid , strident warble , similar to that of the indigo bunting but longer and with less repetition .
5 upper figure , male; lower , femalelazuli buntings breed mostly west of the 100th meridian from southern canada to northern texas , central new mexico and arizona , and southern california .
6  on the pacific coast their breeding range extends south to extreme northwestern baja california .
7  they migrate to southeastern arizona and mexico .
8  their habitat is brushy areas and sometimes weedy pastures , generally well-watered , and sometimes in towns .
9 these birds eat mostly seeds and insects .
10  they may feed conspicuously on the ground or in bushes , but singing males are often very elusive in treetops .
11 this bird makes a loose cup nest of grasses and rootlets placed in a bush .
12  it lays three or four pale blue eggs .
13  in the eastern and southern part of its range , it often hybridizes with the indigo bunting .
14 a beautifully colored bird , the lazuli bunting is common in shrubby areas throughout the american west .
15 adult descriptionsmall songbird .
16 short , thick bill .
17 two wingbars .
18 breeding male with blue head and back , red chest , and white belly .
19 female and nonbreeding male dull brown .
20 male descriptionbreeding (alternate) plumage: head deep blue .
21  upper chest reddish .
22  lower chest , belly , and under tail white .
23  one large and one narrow white wingbar .
24  black in front of eyes .
25  wing feathers dark , edged in blue .
26  nonbreeding (basic) plumage: buffy overall .
27  blue feathers tipped with buff on back and face .
28  blue , reddish , and white feathers tipped with buff on front .
29 female descriptiongrayish brown head , nape , and back .
30  rump brown tinged with light blue .
31  bluish tint on shoulders .
32  two pale tan or whitish wingbars .
33  faint rust band across breast , blending to lighter brown lower on belly .
34  wing and tail feathers brown with slightly blue-tinged edges .
35 immature descriptionsimilar to adult , but first-year male tends to have paler and duller blue feathers with brown or buff tips , especially on head , nape , and back , resulting in variable dull blue-brown , blotchy appearance .
36 conservation statuswidespread and common , numbers apparently stable .
37 familycardinalshabitatopen brush , streamside shrubs .
38  breeds in brushy areas with open grassy ground nearby , such as patches of scrub oak , chaparral , streamside thickets , sometimes in areas of sagebrush or pinyon-juniper woods .
39  in migration and winter , occurs in weedy fields , open woods , brushy places .
40 around thickets and streamside trees of the west , this sky-blue bunting is common in summer .
41  males are conspicuous in summer , singing in the open , but the plainer brown females are far more elusive as they tend their nests in the thick bushes .
42  during migration , flocks are more easily observed as they forage in brushy fields .
43  where lazuli and indigo buntings overlap in breeding range , on the great plains and parts of the southwest , they often interbreed .
44 photo galleryfeeding behaviorforages mainly on the ground , also up in low growth .
45  may bend grass stalks down to the ground to eat the seeds from them .
46  sometimes takes insects from foliage while hovering.3-5, usually 4. pale bluish white , unmarked .
47  incubation is by female only , about 12 days .
48  young: at some nests , nestlings are fed entirely by the female , although at others the male helps to feed them .
49  young leave the nest about 10-12 days after hatching .
50  male may feed the young more after they fledge , while female begins second nesting attempt .
51  2 broods per year , perhaps sometimes 3.youngat some nests , nestlings are fed entirely by the female , although at others the male helps to feed them .
52  young leave the nest about 10-12 days after hatching .
53  male may feed the young more after they fledge , while female begins second nesting attempt .
54  2 broods per year , perhaps sometimes 3.mostly seeds and insects .
55  more than half of summer diet may be insects , including grasshoppers , caterpillars , beetles , true bugs , wild bees , ants , and others .
56  also eats many seeds , mainly those of grasses , also weed seeds and waste grain; seeds may make up most of winter diet .
57  young are fed mostly insects .
58 nestingmale sings to defend nesting territory .
59  where lazuli and indigo buntings overlap in range , they will defend territories against each other .
60  nest: placed in shrubs , vines , or low trees , usually 2-4' above the ground , firmly attached to vertical stems or to forked branch .
61  nest (built by female) is an open cup of grass , weeds , leaves , lined with fine grass and sometimes animal hair .
