0 the brown-headed cowbird (molothrus ater) is a small obligate brood parasitic icterid of temperate to subtropical north america .
1  they are permanent residents in the southern parts of their range; northern birds migrate to the southern united states and mexico in winter , returning to their summer habitat around march or april .
2 [2]descriptionthe brown-headed cowbird is typical for an icterid in general shape , but is distinguished by a finch-like head and beak and is smaller than most icterids .
3  the adult male is iridescent black in color with a brown head .
4  the adult female is slightly smaller and is dull grey with a pale throat and very fine streaking on the underparts .
5  the total length is 1622 cm (6.38.7 in) and the average wingspan is 36 cm (14 in) .
6 [3] body mass can range from 3060 g (1.12.1 oz), with females averaging 38.8 g (1.37 oz) against the males' average of 49 g (1.7 oz) .
7 [4]ecologybrown-headed cowbird male (right) courting femalethe species lives in open or semi-open country and often travels in flocks , sometimes mixed with red-winged blackbirds (particularly in spring) and bobolinks (particularly in fall), as well as common grackles or european starlings .
8 [2] these birds forage on the ground , often following grazing animals such as horses and cows to catch insects stirred up by the larger animals .
9  they mainly eat seeds and insects .
10 before european settlement , the brown-headed cowbird followed bison herds across the prairies .
11  their parasitic nesting behaviour complemented this nomadic lifestyle .
12  their numbers expanded with the clearing of forested areas and the introduction of new grazing animals by settlers across north america .
13  brown-headed cowbirds are now commonly seen at suburban birdfeeders .
14 reproductionjuvenile in californiathe brown-headed cowbird is an obligate brood parasite: it lays its eggs in the nests of other small passerines (perching birds), particularly those that build cup-like nests .
15  the brown-headed cowbird eggs have been documented in nests of at least 220 host species , including hummingbirds and raptors .
16 [5][6] the young cowbird is fed by the host parents at the expense of their own young .
17  brown-headed cowbird females can lay 36 eggs in a season .
18  more than 140 different species of birds are known to have raised young cowbirds .
19 [7]unlike the common cuckoo , the brown-headed cowbird is not divided into gentes whose eggs imitate those of a particular host .
20 some host species , such as the house finch , feed their young a vegetarian diet .
21  this is unsuitable for young brown-headed cowbirds , meaning almost none survive to fledge .
22 [8]male behavior and reproductive successsocial behaviors of cowbird males include aggressive , competitive singing bouts with other males and pair-bonding and monogamy with females .
23 by manipulating demographics so juveniles only had access to females , juvenile males developed atypical social behavior; they did not engage in the typical social singing bouts with other males , did not pair bond with females , and were promiscuous .
24  this demonstrates that there is great flexibility in the behavior of cowbirds , and that the social environment is extremely important in structuring their behavior .
25  adult males housed with juvenile males were shown to have greater reproductive success compared to adult males housed with other adult males .
26  being housed with juvenile males honed the reproductive skills of the adult males by providing them with a more complex social environment .
27 this finding was further studied by comparing the behaviors and reproductive success of males exposed to a dynamic flock , consisting of changing individuals , with males exposed to a static group of individuals .
28  the individuals that stayed with the same group (i .
29 e .
30 , static flock) had a stable , predictable relationship between social behavior and reproductive success; the males that sang high amounts to females experienced the greatest reproductive success .
31  the adult males that were exposed to a rotating roster of new individuals (i .
32 e .
33 , dynamic flock) had an unpredictable relationship between social variables and reproductive success; these males were able to copulate using a much greater variety of social strategies .
34  the males who lived in static flocks had high levels of consistency in their behaviors and reproductive success across multiple years , whereas the males in dynamic flocks experienced varying levels of dominance with other males , differing levels of singing to females , and differing levels of reproductive success .
35 [9]brood parasitismbehaviorbrown-headed cowbirds do not raise their own young , instead laying their eggs in the nests of other bird species .
36  because of this , cowbirds are not exposed to species-typical visual and auditory information like other birds .
37  despite this , cowbirds are able to develop species-typical singing , social , and breeding behaviors .
38 [9]host responsethe acceptance of a cowbird egg and rearing of a cowbird can be costly to a host species .
39  in the american redstart , nests parasitized by cowbirds were found to have a higher rate of predation , likely due in part to the loud begging calls by the cowbird nestling , but also partly explained by the fact that nests likely to be parasitized are also more likely to be predated .
40 [10]host birds sometimes notice the cowbird egg , to which different host species react in different ways .
41  rejection manifests in three forms: nest desertion (e .
42 g .
43 , blue-gray gnatcatcher), burying of the egg under nest material (e .
44 g .
45 , yellow warbler),[11] and physical ejection of the egg from the nest (e .
46 g .
47 , brown thrasher) .
48 [6] brown-headed cowbird nestlings are also sometimes expelled from the nest .
49  the gray catbird rejects cowbird eggs over 95% of the time; experimentation has suggested that in this species , the cost of accepting an egg is much higher (0.79 catbird fledglings) than the cost of rejecting an egg (0.0022 catbird fledglings) .
50 [clarification needed][12]nestlings of host species can also alter their behavior in response to the presence of a cowbird nestling .
51  song sparrow nestlings in parasitized nests alter their vocalizations in frequency and amplitude so that they resemble the cowbird nestling , and these nestlings tend to be fed equally often as nestlings in unparasitized nests .
52 [13]parasite responseit seems that brown-headed cowbirds periodically check on their eggs and young after they have deposited them .
53  removal of the parasitic egg may trigger a retaliatory reaction termed "mafia behavior" .
54  according to a study by the florida museum of natural history published in 1983, the cowbird returned to ransack the nests of a range of host species 56% of the time when their egg was removed .
55  in addition , the cowbird also destroyed nests in a type of "farming behavior" to force the hosts to build new ones .
56  the cowbirds then laid their eggs in the new nests 85% of the time .
57 [14]human interventionhumans sometimes engage in cowbird control programs , with the intention of protecting species negatively impacted by the cowbirds' brood parasitism .
58  a study of nests of bell's vireo highlighted a potential limitation of these control programs , demonstrating that removal of cowbirds from a site may create an unintended consequence of increasing cowbird productivity on that site , because with fewer cowbirds , fewer parasitized nests are deserted , resulting in greater nest success for cowbirds .
