0 the california quail (callipepla californica), also known as the california valley quail or valley quail , is a small ground-dwelling bird in the new world quail family .
1  these birds have a curving crest or plume , made of six feathers , that droops forward: black in males and brown in females; the flanks are brown with white streaks .
2  males have a dark brown cap and a black face with a brown back , a grey-blue chest and a light brown belly .
3  females and immature birds are mainly grey-brown with a light-colored belly .
4  their closest relative is gambel's quail which has a more southerly distribution and , a longer crest at 2.5 in (6.4 cm), a brighter head and a scalier appearance .
5  the two species separated about 12 million years ago , during the late pliocene or early pleistocene.2 it is the state bird of california .
6 taxonomysubspeciesthere are seven recognized subspecies:c .
7  c .
8  achrustera (peters , 1923)  san lucas california quail  southern baja californiac .
9  c .
10  brunnescens (ridgway , 1884)  extreme northern costal california to southern santa cruz countyc .
11  c .
12  californica (shaw , 1798)  northern oregon and western nevada to southern california and coronado islandsc .
13  c .
14  canfieldae (van rossem , 1939)  owen valley quail  owens valley of east central californiac .
15  c .
16  catalinensis (grinnell , 1906)  santa catalina quail  santa catalina island (off southern california)c .
17  c .
18  orecta (oberholser , 1932)  warner valley quail  warner valley in oregon to extreme northern californiac .
19  c .
20  plumbea (grinnell , 1926)  san quintin california quail  san diego county to southern baja californiabehaviorthe california quail is a highly sociable bird that often gathers in small flocks known as "coveys" .
21  one of their daily communal activities is a dust bath .
22  a group of quail will select an area where the ground has been newly turned or is soft , and using their underbellies , will burrow downward into the soil some one to two inches.3 they then wriggle about in the indentations they have created , flapping their wings and ruffling their feathers , causing dust to rise in the air .
23  they seem to prefer sunny places in which to create these dust baths .
24  an ornithologist is able to detect the presence of quail in an area by spotting the circular indentations left behind in the soft dirt , some 715 cm (2.85.9 in) in diameter .
25 they are year-round residents .
26  although this bird coexists well at the edges of urban areas , it is declining in some areas as human populations increase .
27  they were originally found mainly in the southwestern united states but they have been introduced into other areas including british columbia , hawaii , chile , uruguay , brazil , argentina , peru , south africa , new zealand , and to norfolk island and king island in australia.4 these birds forage on the ground , often scratching at the soil .
28  they can sometimes be seen feeding at the sides of roads .
29  their diet consists mainly of seeds and leaves , but they also eat some berries and insects; for example , toyon berries are a common food source.5 if startled , these birds explode into short rapid flight , called "flushing" .
30  given a choice , they will normally escape on foot .
31 breedingtheir breeding habitat is shrubby areas and open woodlands in western north america .
32  the nest is a shallow scrape lined with vegetation on the ground beneath a shrub or other cover .
33  the female usually lays approximately 12 eggs .
34  once hatched , the young associate with both adults .
35  often , families group together , into multifamily "communal broods" which include at least two females , multiple males and many offspring .
36  males associated with families are not always the genetic fathers .
37  in good years , females will lay more than one clutch , leaving the hatched young with the associated male and laying a new clutch , often with a different associated male .
38 they have a variety of vocalizations including the social "chicago" call , contact "pips" and warning "pips" .
39  during the breeding season , males utter the agonistic "squill" and will often interrupt their social mate's "chicago" call with a "squill ," a possible form of antiphonal calling .
