0 the horned lark (eremophila alpestris), called the shore lark in europe , is a species of bird in the genus eremophila .
1 == description ==unlike most other larks , this is a distinctive-looking species on the ground , mainly brown-grey above and pale below , with a striking black and yellow face pattern .
2  except for the central feathers , the tail is mostly black , contrasting with the paler body; this contrast is especially noticeable when the bird is in flight .
3  the summer male has black "horns", which give this species its american name .
4  america has a number of races distinguished by the face pattern and back colour of males , especially in summer .
5  the southern european mountain race eremophila alpestris penicillata is greyer above , and the yellow of the face pattern is replaced with white .
6 vocalizations are high-pitched , lisping or tinkling , and weak .
7  the song , given in flight as is common among larks , consists of a few chips followed by a warbling , ascending trill .
8 == distribution and habitat ==the horned lark breeds across much of north america from the high arctic south to the isthmus of tehuantepec , northernmost europe and asia and in the mountains of south-east europe .
9  there is also an isolated population on a plateau in colombia .
10  it is mainly resident in the south of its range , but northern populations of this passerine bird are migratory , moving further south in winter .
11 this is a bird of open ground .
12  in eurasia it breeds above the tree line in mountains and the far north .
13  in most of europe , it is most often seen on seashore flats in winter , leading to the european name .
14  in the uk it can be found as a winter stopover along the coasts and in eastern england although a mated pair have been recently spotted in windmill end nature reserve in the west midlands .
15  in america , where there are no other larks to compete with , it is also found on farmland , on prairies , in deserts , on golf courses and airports , and the like .
16 == behaviour ===== breeding ===the nest is on the ground , with two to five eggs being laid .
17  food is seeds supplemented with insects in the breeding season .
18  the nest may be near corn or soybeans for a source of food , and the female chooses the site .
19 == status and conservation ==in the open areas of western north america , horned larks are among the bird species most often killed by wind turbines .
20  in 2013, the u.s.
22  fish and wildlife service listed the subspecies streaked horned lark (eremophila alpestris strigata) as threatened under the endangered species act .
