0 busy flocks of cliff swallows often swarm around bridges and overpasses in summer , offering passers-by a chance to admire avian architecture and family life at once .
1  clusters of their intricate mud nests cling to vertical walls , and when a cliff swallow is home you can see its bright forehead glowing from the dim entrance .
2  these common , sociable swallows are nearly always found in large groups , whether theyre chasing insects high above the ground , preening on perches , or dipping into a river for a bath .
3 size & shapethese compact swallows have pointed , broad-based wings , a small head , and a medium-length , squared tail .
4 color patternin poor light , cliff swallows look brownish with dark throats and white underparts .
5  in good light youll see their metallic , dark-blue backs and pale , pumpkin-colored rumps .
6  they have rich , brick-red faces and a bright buff-white forehead patch like a headlamp .
7  some juveniles show whitish throats in summer and fall .
8 behaviorcliff swallows zoom around in intricate aerial patterns to catch insects on the wing .
9  when feeding in flocks with other species of swallows , they often stay higher in the air .
10  they build mud nests in colonies on cliff ledges or under bridges , eaves , and culverts .
11 habitatcliff swallows traditionally built their nests on vertical cliff faces .
12  with the expansion of road infrastructure they have adopted many bridges , overpasses , and culverts as their colonial nesting sites .
13  they feed in areas near and over water , frequently mixing with other species of swallows .
14 conservation statusdeclines have been noted in a few areas , but general continent-wide trend is toward wider range and higher numbers .
15 familyswallowshabitatopen to semi-open land , farms , cliffs , river bluffs , lakes .
16  widespread in all kinds of semi-open country , especially near water , from prairies to desert rivers to clearings in northern forest .
17  breeds where it can find sheltered vertical cliffs or other surfaces for nesting and a supply of mud for building the nest; still unaccountably scarce or missing in some seemingly suitable areas .
18 this swallow is probably far more common today than when the pilgrims landed .
19  originally it built its jug-shaped mud nests on the sides of cliffs .
20  however , the sides of barns and the supports of bridges provided sheltered sites that were far more widespread than the natural ones .
21  taking advantage of these artificial locations , the species has invaded many areas where it never nested before .
22  although it is continuing to spread in the east , it is still more common in the west , where practically every culvert and highway bridge seems to have its own cliff swallow colony .
23 photo galleryfeeding behaviorfeeds mostly on the wing .
24  often forages in flocks , and may feed low over the water or very high over other terrain .
25  in bad weather , may feed on ground.4-5, sometimes 3-6. white to pale pinkish , spotted with brown .
26  incubation is by both parents , 14-16 days .
27  young: both parents bring food for nestlings .
28  young leave nest about 21-23 days after hatching .
29 youngboth parents bring food for nestlings .
30  young leave nest about 21-23 days after hatching .
31 insects .
32  feeds mostly on a wide variety of flying insects , particularly beetles (including june beetles and adult weevils), true bugs , flies , winged ants , bees , and wasps .
33  also eats grasshoppers , mayflies , lacewings , and various other insects , plus some spiders .
34  occasionally eats berries .
35 nestingtypically nests in colonies , sometimes with hundreds of nests crowded close together .
36  nest site is usually on vertical surface with some overhead shelter .
37  natural sites were on cliffs; most sites today on sides of buildings , under bridges , in culverts , or similar places .
38  nest is made of dried mud and shaped like a gourd , with large chamber for nest , narrowing to small entrance on side .
39  both sexes help build nest; inside of nest sparsely lined with grass and feathers .
40  may repair and reuse old nest , sometimes that of another species .
