0 the cave swallow (petrochelidon fulva) is a medium-sized , squarish tailed swallow belonging to the same genus as the more familiar and widespread cliff swallow of north america .
1  the cave swallow , also native to the americas , nests and roosts primarily in caves and sinkholes .
2 cave swallows are found in mexico and the greater antilles , with fall and winter vagrants reaching the east and gulf coasts of the u.s.
4  breeding colonies occur in south-eastern new mexico , texas , florida , the greater antilles , portions of southern mexico , and along the west coast of south america .
5  five subspecies are currently recognized according to birds of north america , three occurring in north america and two in south america .
6 ==description==the cave swallow measures 12 to 14 cm in length and weighs 19 g on average .
7  the largest of the five subspecies , p .
8  f .
9  pallida , has an average wing length between 107.0 and 112.3 mm; the smallest subspecies , p .
10  f .
11  aequatorialis , has an average wing length between 93.0 and 93.5 mm .
12  differences between the sexes are minimal , both are similar in size and weight and are difficult to distinguish from their plumage .
13  it has grey-blue upperparts and brown-tangerine forefront and throat .
14 ==taxonomy==the cave swallow is a passerine belonging to the swallow and martin family , hirundinidae .
15  the genus petrochelidon is a collection of cliff-nesting swallows and martins , though only the two south american subspecies prefer nesting on cliff-faces .
16  the three north american subspecies prefer nesting in caves and sinkholes , as their common name suggests .
17  five subspecies of petrochelidon fulva are currently recognized .
18 the three north american subspecies are p .
19  f .
20  fulva , p .
21  f .
22  pallida , and p .
23  f .
24  citata .
25  all three will usually nest in natural caves and sinkholes , or in some areas they will nest in or underneath man-made structures (highway culverts , under bridges , etc .
26 ) .
27  all three have larger wing-spans than the remaining two south american subspecies .
28  p .
29  f .
30  fulva occurs in the greater antilles and southern florida .
31  p .
32  f .
33  pallida (also known as p .
34  f .
35  pelodoma) is found farther west in the south-western united states and into north-eastern mexico .
36  h .
37  f .
38  citata has the southernmost range of the north american subspecies and is found on the yucatn peninsula of mexico .
39 the remaining two south american subspecies of the cave swallow are sometimes regarded as distinct species separate from the species fulva; not only is their range geographically separate from the north american subspecies but they also choose distinctly different nesting sites .
40  rather than nesting in caves and sinkholes , p .
41  f .
42  aequatorialis and p .
43  f .
44  rufocollaris are nest in open areas , such as on cliff faces and the sides of buildings .
45  p .
46  f .
47  aequatorialis is found in ecuador , and it is speculated that it may extend its range into peru .
48  p .
49  f .
50  rufocollaris occurs in north-western peru .
51  these two subspecies have smaller wingspans than their north american counterpartsp .
52  f .
53  citata and p .
54  f .
55  pallida are generally accepted as distinct subspecies of p .
56  fulva , however , cytochrome b and microsatellite data support an emerging consensus that p .
57  f .
58  rufocollaris should in fact be considered its own species within petrochelidon .
59 ==habitat==during the breeding season , p .
60  f .
61   fulva , p .
62  f .
63  pallida , and p .
64  f .
65  citata , the north american subspecies of the cave swallow , will usually nest in a caves , sinkholes , and sometimes in man-made structures offering similar habitat , such as highway culverts .
66  p .
67  f .
68  aequatorialis and p .
69  f .
70  rufocollaris , the south american subspecies , prefer to nest in open areas such as on cliff faces and the sides of buildings .
71 both will forage for insects over open areas and water nearby their roosting sites .
72  the spring and fall migration of cave swallows is poorly known; however , p .
73  f .
74  citata , p .
75  f .
76  aequatorialis and p .
77  f .
78  rufocollaris are considered resident species and winter in their breeding range .
79 ===distribution===p .
80  f .
81  pallida is found farther west in the south-western united states and into north-eastern mexico .
82  p .
83  f .
84  citata has the southernmost range of the north american subspecies and is found on the yucatn peninsula of mexico .
85  p .
86  f .
87  aequatorialis is found in ecuador , and it is speculated that it may extend its range into peru .
88  p .
89  f .
90  rufocollaris occurs in north-western peru .
91 breeding is known to occur in mexico , south-eastern new mexico , southern florida , greater antilles and in areas of texas .
92  the south american populations , as well as most mexican and caribbean populations , are considered resident populations which breed and overwinter in the same geographic range .
93  the new mexico and other northern populations migrate south; however , it is not known where they migrate to or which migration routes they take .
94  cave swallows have been observed to overwinter in southern texas since at least the 1980s .
95 ==behaviour=====vocalizations===cave swallow chicks begin giving faint calls shortly after hatching .
96  as the chicks develop their calls become louder and more aggressive .
97  these calls allow the chicks to communicate to the attending parent(s) their basic needs , such as hunger .
98 there is currently no data regarding differences in vocalizations between the subspecies of cave swallows , however , the following descriptions are based on observations of h .
99  f .
100  pallida .
101  adults utilize five main vocalizations: a song , "che" note , and three types of chattering described by selander and baker (1957) .
102 cave swallows are most often heard singing from march to august in texas and new mexico , corresponding more or less to their breeding season .
103  in general , birds are vocal throughout the day when their nesting colony is active , however , they are usually loud and vocal at their nest site , becoming quieter as they move away from their nest .
104 ===diet and foraging behaviour===cave swallows feed on small to medium-sized flying insects throughout the day .
105  they forage in loose flocks over open areas , on open vegetation , and against cliff-faces .
106  during the nesting season , adult cave swallows preferentially forage in the early hours of the morning and in the late afternoon .
107  they capture a wide variety of insects during the nesting season , included species from the families acrididae ,  lygaeidae , reduviidae , and others .
108  they drink while in flight by skimming the surface of pools and rivers .
109 a benefit to nesting in colonies could be the ability to share and procure information about food sources from neighbouring birds while raising chicks .
110  while research has not been conducted on cave swallows themselves , some studies have been done on the closely related cliff and bank swallows .
111  cliff swallow nesting colonies have been suggested to serve as , "information centres", where swallows can gather and glean information from one another regarding how well they are foraging .
112  cliff swallows have been observed to follow , or be followed by , other birds within the nesting colony to food sources; birds that were unsuccessful foraging will return to the colony to find a fellow roost-mate that has been successful , whom they will follow to a food source .
113  bank swallows , however , do not appear to use small nesting colonies (26-52 nesting pairs is considered a small colony) as , "information centres", but it should be noted that the cliff swallow colonies previously mentioned were large colonies in which there are more potentially successful foragers for other birds to follow .
114 ===reproduction===as previously mentioned , north american subspecies of cave swallows roost and nest primarily in caves and sinkholes while the south american subspecies prefer open spaces such as cliff-faces and the sides of buildings .
115  breeding occurs between april and august .
116  north american subspecies are currently undergoing a human-facilitated range expansion due to the increased availability of alternative nesting sites .
117  these include highway culverts and bridges .
118  in texas alone cave swallows have increased their breeding range 898% between 1957 and 1999, with populations increasing at a rate of about 10.8% each year .
119 cave swallows are open-cup nesters , meaning they build a nest shaped like a cup with the top left open for them to fly in and out .
120  the nests are made of mud and bat guano and can be reused for multiple breeding seasons .
121  old barn swallow nests are also utilized by cave swallows , which will modify them to suit their needs .
122  barn swallows and cave swallows are observed to co-exist at some nesting sites , making old barn swallow nests easily available to the cave swallow .
123  cave swallows are social and prefer to nest in variably sized colonies .
124  they are even observed to occasionally share nest sites with other species of swallows , such as barn swallows .
125  this occurs particularly often in north central mexico and increasingly in the united states with the increased use of highway culverts as nesting sites .
126  some concerns have been raised about the potential for , and instances of , interbreeding between the two species and the viability of the hybrids .
127 while the use of human-made nesting sites has allowed the cave swallow to greatly increase its range across north america , it may come with its own risks .
128  culvert and bridge nesting sites have an increased risk of flooding the nest area , a more variable thermal regime during the breeding season , an increased instance of sharing the colony site with other species , an increased risk of nest predation , and fewer available nesting materials .
129   caves and sinkholes , however , are not at great risk of flooding , have a less variable thermal regime , lower instance of sharing the site with other species , lower risk of predation , and easily available nesting materials .
130   all this being said , cave swallows nesting at the culvert site laid more eggs , had more eggs hatch , and had more nestlings survive than those nesting at dunbar cave in 1974, which could explain why the population is growing so rapidly while using a riskier nest site .
131 ====incubation behaviour and clutch characteristics====cave swallow eggs are elliptical ovate in shape and typically white in colour with some variation of fine spotting of light to dark brown or even lilac and dull purple .
132  clutches of three to five eggs are typical and both sexes are thought to contribute to the incubation of the clutch .
133  only the female is observed to develop a brood patch .
134 cave swallows are altricial when they hatch; they are blind and incapable of sustaining their own body heat .
135  they remain in the nest until they are capable of flying , which is approximately 20 to 22 days after hatching .
136  both parents will feed the nestlings small insects throughout the day and will defend the nest if threatened by swooping and loudly calling at the threat .
