0 the oak titmouse (baeolophus inornatus) is a passerine bird in the tit family paridae .
1  the american ornithologists' union split the plain titmouse into the oak titmouse and the juniper titmouse in 1996, due to distinct differences in song , preferred habitat , and genetic makeup .
2 the oak titmouse is a small , brown-tinged gray bird with small tuft or crest .
3  the face is plain , and the undersides are a lighter gray .
4  sexes are similar , as there is very little to no sexual dimorphism .
5 this species lives year-round on the pacific slope , resident from southern oregon south through california west of the sierra nevada to baja california , but its range surrounds the central san joaquin valley .
6  it prefers open woodlands of warm , dry oak and oak-pine at low to mid-elevations but can also be found in forests as long as adequate oak trees are present .
7 the oak titmouse will sleep in cavities , dense foliage or birdhouses .
8  when roosting in foliage , the titmouse chooses a twig surrounded by dense foliage or an accumulation of dead pine needles , simulating a roost in a cavity .
9  it forms pairs or small groups , but does not form large flocks .
10  it may join mixed-species flocks after breeding season for foraging .
11  pairs stay together after the breeding season .
12 oak titmice eat insects and spiders , and are sometimes seen catching insects in mid air .
13  they will also take berries , acorns , and some seeds .
14  this species forages on foliage , twigs , branches , trunks , and occasionally on ground , sometimes hanging upside down to forage , and hammering seeds against branches to open them .
15  oak titmice are attracted to feeders with suet , peanut butter and sunflower seeds .
16 the song of the oak titmouse is a series of repeated whistled notes of three to seven syllables , with first syllable higher in pitch than the following one .
17  the call is a scratchy tsicka-dee-dee .
18 the oak titmouse builds its nest in a woodpecker hole , a natural cavity , or a nest box , using grass , moss , mud , hair , feathers , and fur .
19  it breeds from march into july , with peak activity in april and may , laying 39 eggs , usually 68. the female is the primary incubator , with incubation taking 1416 days .
20  young are altricial and are tended by both parents in nest for 1621 days .
21  parents continue to tend to young for another three to four weeks after they leave the nest .
22 the oak titmouse and juniper titmouse appear almost identical , but differ in voice as well as range .
23  the oak titmouse has a browner back than the juniper titmouse .
24  the oak titmouse gives a repeated series of three to seven syllables , each comprising one low and one high note , while the juniper titmouse song consists of a series of rapid syllables on the same note .
25  ranges overlap only in a small area in california .
26  the tufted titmouse , which does not overlap in range , has whiter belly , rusty flanks , and black on the forehead .
