0 bushtitconservation statuswidespread and common , numbers apparently stable .
1 familybushtitshabitatoak scrub , chaparral , mixed woods , pinyons , junipers .
2  lives in many kinds of wooded or brushy habitats , from the lowlands to middle elevations in the mountains , including chaparral , oak forest , pinyon-juniper and pine-oak woods , streamside groves , and well-wooded suburbs and city parks .
3  avoids high mountains and hot desert regions , but may appear in cottonwood-willow groves along desert streams in winter .
4 tiny , drab birds with light ticking and lisping callnotes , bushtits are common in woods and mountains of the west , but they are often inconspicuous .
5  a flock feeding in a tree may go almost unnoticed until the birds fly out , perhaps twenty or thirty of them , in a straggling single file to the next tree .
6  they are very sociable at most seasons , and groups will roost huddled close together in a tight mass on cold nights .
7 feeding behaviorforages very actively in trees and shrubs , moving rapidly among foliage and small twigs , often hanging upside down at the ends of twigs while probing among pine needles or the bases of leaves .
8  except when nesting , usually forages in flocks.5-7. white .
9  incubation is by both parents , about 12 days .
10  both parents may sleep in nest at night .
11  young: fed and brooded by both parents .
12  young leave nest about 14-15 days after hatching .
13  2 broods per year .
14 youngfed and brooded by both parents .
15  young leave nest about 14-15 days after hatching .
16  2 broods per year .
17 mostly insects .
18  feeds on a wide variety of tiny insects , especially leafhoppers , treehoppers , aphids , scale insects , caterpillars , and beetles; also wasps , ants , and many others , including eggs and pupae of many insects .
19  also eats some spiders , berries , and sometimes seeds .
20 nestingafter winter flocks break up , pairs establish territories but do not defend them strongly , tolerating other bushtits even near nest .
21  if pairs are disturbed during early stages of nesting , they reportedly may abandon the effort and build a new nest , perhaps with a different mate .
22  nest site is in a tree or shrub , 8-35' above the ground , sometimes lower or higher .
23  nest (built by both sexes) is firmly attached to twigs and branches , a tightly woven hanging pocket , up to a foot long; small entrance hole near top leads to narrow passage which opens into nest chamber .
24  nest is made of spiderwebs , moss , grass , lichens , leaves , rootlets , twigs; inside lined with plant down , animal hair , feathers .
