0 the pygmy nuthatch (sitta pygmaea) is a tiny songbird , about 10 cm (4 inches) long and about 10 grams in weight .
1   it ranges from southern british columbia south through various discontinuous parts of the western u.s.
3  (northwest u.s.
5 , sierra nevada range , southern rockies , etc .
6 ), to central mexico .
7   it is usually found in pines (especially ponderosa pines), douglas-firs , and other conifers .
8  pygmy nuthatches clamber acrobatically in the foliage of these trees , feeding on insects and seeds; less often they creep along limbs or the trunk like bigger nuthatches .
9 pygmy nuthatches nest in cavities in dead stubs of conifers , lining the bottom of the cavity with pine-cone scales , plant down , and other soft plant and animal materials .
10   they may fill cracks or crevices around the entrance with fur; the function of this behavior is unknown .
11   the female lays 49 eggs , which are white with fine reddish-brown spotting .
12   she does most of the incubation , which lasts about 16 days .
13   the young leave the nest about 22 days after hatching .
14 this species is highly gregarious .
15   a nesting pair may have other birds as helpers .
16   outside the breeding season , this bird wanders in noisy flocks .
17   it also roosts communally; over 100 birds have been seen huddled in a single tree cavity .
18 all plumages are similar , with a warm gray cap , blue-gray upper-parts , and whitish underparts .
19   the only feature not seen in the photograph is a whitish spot on the nape , particularly in worn plumage (summer) .
20   vocalizations are highly varied chirps , peeps , and chattering .
21 this species is very similar to the brown-headed nuthatch of the southeastern u.s.
23   their ranges have no overlap .
24 the pygmy nuthatch features prominently in the climax of the 2000 film charlie's angels , in which cameron diaz's character , natalie , discovers the location of the villains' fortress by identifying the call of the pygmy nuthatch , which she says only live in carmel , californiathough the bird shown is not a pygmy nuthatch , which in any case is found in a much wider range .
25  (the hollywood impostor is a venezuelan troupial , icterus icterus .
