0 the american dipper (cinclus mexicanus), also known as a water ouzel , is a stocky dark grey bird with a head sometimes tinged with brown , and white feathers on the eyelids that cause the eyes to flash white as the bird blinks .
1  it is 16.5 cm long and weighs on average 46 g .
2  it has long legs , and bobs its whole body up and down during pauses as it feeds on the bottom of fast-moving , rocky streams .
3  it inhabits the mountainous regions of central america and western north america from panama to alaska .
4 this species , like other dippers , is equipped with an extra  eyelid called a "nictitating membrane" that allows it to see underwater , and scales that close its nostrils when submerged .
5   dippers also produce more oil than most birds , which may help keep them warmer when seeking food underwater .
6 in most of its habits , it closely resembles its european counterpart , the white-throated dipper , cinclus cinclus , which is also sometimes known as a water ouzel .
7  it feeds on aquatic insects and their larvae , including dragonfly nymphs , small crayfish , and caddisfly larvae .
8  it may also take tiny fish or tadpoles .
9 the song consists of high whistles or trills peee peee pijur pijur repeated a few times .
10  both sexes of this bird sing year round .
11  it defends a linear territory along streams .
12   its habit of diving underwater in search of food can infrequently make it the prey of large salmonids like bull or dolly varden trout .
13 the american dipper's nest is a globe-shaped structure with a side entrance , close to water , on a rock ledge , river bank , behind a waterfall or under a bridge .
14  the normal clutch is 2-4 white eggs , incubated solely by the female , which hatch after about 1517 days , with another 2025 days to fledging .
15  the male helps to feed the young .
16 it is usually a permanent resident , moving slightly south or to lower elevations if necessary to find food or unfrozen water .
17  the presence of this indicator species shows good water quality; it has vanished from some locations due to pollution or increased silt load in streams .
18 there is at least one record of an american dipper being eaten by a dolly varden trout .
