0 the wrentit (chamaea fasciata) is a small bird that lives in chaparral , oak woodlands , and bushland on the western coast of north america .
1  it is the only species in the genus chamaea .
2 its systematics have been the subject of much debate , the wrentit having been placed in many different families by different authors for as long as it has been known to science .
3  its common name reflects the uncertainty , and its external resemblance to both tits and wrens .
4  it is by no means closely related to either however .
5 ==description==the wrentit is a small , {convert|15|cm|in|abbr=on} bird with uniform dull olive , brown , or grayish plumage .
6  it has short wings and a long tail often held high (hence the comparison to wrens) .
7  it has a short bill and a pale iris .
8  given its retiring nature and loud voice , the wrentit is more likely to be detected by its call than by sight .
9  the distinct sound that it makes is similar to the sound of a ping-pong ball falling on the table .
10 ==systematics==the wrentit has been variously placed in its own family , the chamaeidae , or with the long-tailed tits (aegithalidae), the true tits and chickadees (paridae), the "old world warblers" (sylviidae), and with the "old world babblers" (timaliidae) .
11  the american ornithologists' union places the wrentit in the latter family , giving it the distinction of being the only babbler known from the new world .
12  this is based on dna-dna hybridization studies , which are phenetic however and therefore not considered methodologically adequate today .
13 {citation needed|date=december 2011}through dna sequence analysis , it was subsequently discovered that the wrentit was more closely allied to sylvia warblers and some aberrant "babblers" .
14  these consequently must be placed in the sylviidae family together with the wrentit and the parrotbills which also turned out to be close relatives .
15  thus , the wrentit is the only american species of the "true" or sylviid warblers .
16  peculiarly , the dartford warbler and close relatives like marmora's warbler bear an uncanny resemblance to the wrentit; their ecology is quite similar indeed as all are birds of mediterranean scrub .
17  however , biogeography and the molecular data build a strong case for this similarity being a case of convergent evolution between birds that are close relatives but by far not as close as their appearance would suggest .
18 alice cibois suggested that as some babblers are closer to typical warblers than these are to marsh-warblers for example , the sylviidae should be merged into the timaliidae .
19  as such an abolishing of the senior synonym would require a formal international commission on zoological nomenclature ruling and the typical warblers and relatives are still a monophyletic group at present , this proposal is not advanced by most researchers until the remaining sylviidae and timaliidae genera are studied as regards their relationships .
20 {citation needed|date=december 2011}==distribution==the wrentit is a sedentary (non-migratory) resident of a narrow strip of coastal habitat in the western coast of north america , being found from oregon south through california , to baja california , the north state of the baja california peninsula .
21 it is usually restricted to certain chaparral and woodland habitats .
22  it nests in {convert|1|m} high shrubs such as poison oak (toxicodendron diversilobum), coyote bush (baccharis pilularis) and california blackberry (rubus ursinus) .
23  logging and other changes in habitat have led to this species expanding its range recently , particularly northwards .
24 ==ecology==wrentits mate for life , forming pair bonds only a few months after hatching .
25  both sexes sing; the faster rhythm of the male's song is one of the few ways to differentiate the sexes .
26  both sexes also defend their territory year-round and participate in building the nest , a four-stage process that takes about two weeks .
27  the three or four eggs are incubated for 14 days , again by both sexes .
28  the chicks fledge after 15 days (at which stage they are unable to fly) and are fed by their parents for another 40 days .
29 the wrentit feeds by skulking through dense scrub gleaning exposed insects found by sight .
30  it feeds primarily on beetles , caterpillars , bugs , and ants , but also takes small berries and seeds .
