0 the gadwall (anas strepera) is a common and widespread duck of the family anatidae .
1 systematicsthe gadwall was first described by linnaeus in 1758 in his systema naturae , under its current scientific name.2 dna studies have shown that it is a sister species with the falcated duck , and that these two are closely related to the wigeons.3 there two subspecies:4a .
2  s .
3  strepera , described by linnaeus , is the nominate subspecies .
4 daggera .
5  s .
6  couesi , coues' gadwall , extinct circa 1874, was formerly found on teraina , a coral atoll in the pacific ocean.5the etymology of the word gadwall is not known , but the name has been in use since 1666.6descriptionthe gadwall is 4656 cm (1822 in) long with a 7890 cm (3135 in) wingspan.7 the male is slightly larger than the female , weighing on average 990 g (35 oz) against her 850 g (30 oz).8 the breeding male is patterned grey , with a black rear end , light chestnut wings , and a brilliant white speculum , obvious in flight or at rest.9 in non-breeding (eclipse) plumage , the drake looks more like the female , but retains the male wing pattern , and is usually greyer above and has less orange on the bill.8the female is light brown , with plumage much like a female mallard .
7  it can be distinguished from that species by the dark orange-edged bill , smaller size , the white speculum , and white belly.9 both sexes go through two moults annually , following a juvenile moult.7the gadwall is a quieter duck , except during its courtship display .
8  females give a call similar to the quack of a female mallard but higher-pitched , transcribed as gag-ag-ag-ag .
9  males give a grunt , transcribed as nheck , and a whistle.8distributionthe gadwall breeds in the northern areas of europe and asia , and central north america .
10  in north america , its breeding range lies along the saint lawrence river , through the great lakes , alberta , saskatchewan , the dakotas , south to kansas , west to california , and along coastal pacific canada and southern coastal alaska.79 the range of this bird appears to be expanding into eastern north america .
11  this dabbling duck is strongly migratory , and winters farther south than its breeding range , from coastal alaska , south into central america , and east into idaho , kansas , ohio , virginia , and then south all the way into central america.79 its conservation status is least concern.1in great britain , the gadwall is a scarce-breeding bird and winter visitor , though its population has increased in recent years .
12  it is likely that its expansion was partly through introduction , mainly to england , and partly through colonization to great britain , with continental birds staying to breed in scotland .
13  it has been reported in the river avon in hampshire and wiltshire .
14  in ireland a small breeding population has recently become established , centred on wexford in the south and lough neagh in the north.10behaviourthe gadwall is a bird of open wetlands , such as prairie or steppe lakes , wet grassland or marshes with dense fringing vegetation , and usually feeds by dabbling for plant food with head submerged .
15  it nests on the ground , often some distance from water .
16  it is not as gregarious as some dabbling ducks outside the breeding season and tends to form only small flocks .
17  this is a fairly quiet species; the male has a hoarse whistling call , and the female has a mallard-like quack .
18  the young birds are fed insects at first; adults also eat some molluscs and insects during the nesting season .
19  the gadwall is one of the species to which the agreement on the conservation of african-eurasian migratory waterbirds (aewa) applies .
