0 the green-tailed towhee (pipilo chlorurus) is the smallest towhee , but is still one of the larger members of the american sparrow family emberizidae .
1 its breeding range covers most of the interior western united states , with a winter range in mexico and the southern edge of the southwestern united states .
2 this bird can be recognized by the bright green stripes on the edge of its wings .
3  it has a distinct white throat and a rufous cap .
4  it measures 7.25 in (18.4 cm) long and weighs 29 g (1.0 oz) .
5 [2]it is fairly tame , but often stays hidden under a bush .
6  it is fairly common in habitats with sagebrush and other such bushes .
7  it is uncommonly seen because of its tendency to stay under cover .
8 theres nothing quite like the color that gives the green-tailed towhee its namea deep olive lightening to yellow-green on the edges of the wings and tail .
9  set off by a gray chest , white throat , and rufous crown , this large sparrow is a colorful resident of the wests shrubby mountainsides and sagebrush expansesif you can see one .
10  they spend their time scratching at leaf litter under dense cover , occasionally popping into view to whistle a song or give a querulous mewing call .
11 size & shapegreen-tailed towhees are small but chunky songbirds with a big head , stocky body and longish tail .
12  the bill is thick and sparrowlike .
13  they are larger than most sparrows and have shorter tails than most other towhees .
14 color patterngreen-tailed towhees are grayish birds with olive-yellow wings , back and tail .
15  the head is strongly marked with a bright rufous crown , white throat , and a dark mustache stripe .
16 behaviorgreen-tailed towhees forage on the ground or in dense shrubby foliage .
17  they can be hard to see except when males sing from the top of a shrub .
18  their call , a quiet , catlike mew , can help you find them .
19 habitatlook for green-tailed towhees in shrubby habitats of the west , particularly disturbed areas of montane forest and open slopes in the great basin , sagebrush steppes , and high desert .
20  in winter , they join mixed flocks in dense mesquite areas of desert washes .
