0 the swamp sparrow (melospiza georgiana) is a medium-sized sparrow related to the song sparrow .
1 adults have streaked rusty , buff and black upperparts with an unstreaked gray breast , light belly and a white throat .
2  the wings are strikingly rusty .
3  most males and a few females have a rust-colored caps .
4  their face is gray with a dark line through the eye .
5  they have a short bill and fairly long legs .
6  immature birds and winter adults usually have two brown crown stripes and much of the gray is replaced with buff .
7 swamp sparrows breed across the northern united states and boreal canada .
8  the southern edge of their breeding range coincides largely with the line of maximum glaciation .
9  a small number of morphologically distinct birds inhabit tidal marshes from northern virginia to the hudson river estuary .
10  this subspecies (m .
11  g .
12  nigrescens) winters in coastal marshes of the carolinas and differs from the two inland swamp sparrow subspecies in having more black in a grayer overall plumage , larger bill , different songs , and a smaller average clutch size .
13 their breeding habitat is marshes , including brackish marshes , across eastern north america and central canada .
14  the bulky nest is attached to marsh vegetation , often just above the ground or surface of the water with leaves or grass arching over the top .
15  the female builds a new nest each year and lays an average of four eggs per clutch .
16  females give a series of chips as they leave the nest , probably to ward off attacks by their mate or neighboring males .
17 while swamp sparrows can be found year-round in small numbers on the southern edge of their breeding range , individuals are probably all migratory , primarily migrating to the southeastern united states .
18 swamp sparrows generally forage on the ground near the water's edge , in shallow water or in marsh vegetation .
19  in winter , their diet is principally fruit and seeds , while during the breeding season their diet is mainly arthropods .
20 the song of the swamp sparrow is a slow monotone trill , slower than that of the chipping sparrow .
21  a male can have a repertoire of several different trills .
22  the common call note is a loud chip reminiscent of a phoebe .
23  this bird's numbers have declined due to habitat loss in some parts of its range .
24 ==gallery== image:swampsparrow .
25 jpg|swamp sparrow taken at lake mattamuskeet image:swamp_sparrow .
