0 the eastern wood pewee (contopus virens) is a small tyrant flycatcher from north america .
1  this bird and the western wood pewee (c .
2  sordidulus) were formerly considered to be a single species .
3  the two species are virtually identical in appearance , and can be distinguished most easily by their calls .
4 ==description==adults are gray-olive on the upperparts with light underparts , washed with olive on the breast .
5  they have two wing bars , and the primary remiges are long , giving the wingtip a slim and very pointed appearance .
6  the upper part of the bill is dark , the lower part is yellowish .
7  the songs are basically a mournful whistled pee-a'wee given in a series , which gave this bird its name , and a "pe-wee" with a rising note at the end .
8 ==similar species==the western wood pewee (c .
9  sordidulus) is essentially indistinguishable visually .
10  but its range is parapatric to the west of c .
11  virens , and its songa descending tsee-tsee-tsee-peeeris entirely different .
12 the eastern phoebe (sayornis phoebe) is similar , particularly in the worn plumage after breeding .
13  it always lacks clearly defined wingbars , however , and bobs its tail frequently .
14  it has a shorter primary projection .
15  the eastern phoebe is also present on the breeding grounds by march , while eastern wood pewees don't arrive until very late april and early may .
16  the songs (fee-bee , fee-bee) and calls (chip) are quite different .
17 the least flycatcher (empidonax minimus) is quite similar to the eastern wood pewee in plumage , but has a bold eye ring and much shorter primary projection , appearing rather blunt-winged .
18  it also has a shorter bill and is smaller overall .
19  the songs (che-bec , che-bec) and calls (a sharp whit) are very different .
20  file:contopus virenspcca20050724-9873b .
21 jpg|eastern wood pewee , has two crisp , pale wing bars and long primary projection file:westernwoodpewee23.jpg|western wood pewee looks like its sister species file:sayornis phoebe ct4.jpg|eastern phoebe lacks bolder wing bars and has shorter primary projection file:empidonax-minimus-001.jpg|least flycatcher has bold eye-rings and shorter primary projection file:eastern_wood_pewee_(contopus_virens) .
22 jpg ==ecology==their breeding habitat is deciduous , mixed woods , or pine plantations in eastern north america .
23  these birds migrate to central america and in the andes region of northern south america .
24  they feed on insects and other arthropods .
25  wood pewees wait on a perch at a middle height in a tree and fly out to catch prey in flight , sometimes hovering to pick it from vegetation .
26 eastern wood pewees arrive relatively late on breeding grounds (e .
27 g .
28 , 18 may to 5 june in southern ontario) .
29  they are rarely seen on their breeding grounds before the last days of april further south .
30  they migrate south at a more usual time , leaving sometimes in late august but most often in september .
31  migration times have stayed the same in the last 100 years .
32  they migrate quickly for most of the journey , dispersing and moving at a slower speed when approaching breeding or wintering range .
33  for example , in the cayman islands which are offshore the winter quarters , the species is only rarely and briefly encountered , but passes through on its way north as early as mid-late february .
34 ===breeding===c .
35  virens makes an open cup nest made of grasses , bark , and lichen , attached to a horizontal tree branch with spider webs .
36  nest sites range in height from {convert|15|to|60|ft|m|abbr=on}, but average around {convert|30|ft|m|abbr=on} .
37  common nest trees used include oaks (quercus), pines (pinus), birches (betula), and maples (acer) .
38  the female lays almost always three (sometimes two) translucent-white eggs with brown flecking concentrated towards the larger end of the ovate egg .
39  males are territorial and defend the nesting area aggressively , often fighting with neighbouring conspecifics and even pursue attacks on other species (e .
40 g .
41 , least flycatchers , american robins , chipping sparrows , red-eyed vireos , etc .
42 ) .
43  males can sometimes be polygynous , mating with two females , simultaneously .
44 the eggs hatch in 1214 days and both parents bring food to the altricial nestlings .
45  nestlings typically fledge 1517 days after hatching , often ending up on the ground during the first flight out of the nest .
46  the adults will perch on a nearby branch and call out to the nestlings , keeping contact and providing them with food until the young are able to fly to join them .
47 ===conservation status===the eastern wood pewee is common , widespread , and not considered globally threatened by the iucn .
48 its numbers , however , are declining in recent decades , possibly due to the loss of forest habitat in its winter range .
49  it is also possible that the increase of white-tailed deer (odocoileus virginianus) in its breeding range has led to a change in vegetation and associated invertebrates in the lower levels of the deciduous forests where the eastern wood pewee breeds .
