0 the cordilleran flycatcher (empidonax occidentalis) is a small insect-eating bird .
1  it is a small empidonax flycatcher , with typical length ranging from 13 to 17 cm .
2 adults have olive-gray upperparts , darker on the wings and tail , with yellowish underparts; they have a conspicuous teardrop-shaped white eye ring , white wing bars , a small bill and a short tail .
3   many species of this genus look closely alike .
4   the best ways to distinguish species are by voice , by breeding habitat , and by range .
5   this bird is virtually identical to the pacific-slope flycatcher .
6  these two species were formerly considered a single species known as western flycatcher .
7   the pacific-slope flycatcher is a breeding bird of the pacific coast forests and mountain ranges from california to alaska; the cordilleran is a breeding bird of the rocky mountains .
8   they have different songs and calls .
9 cordilleran flycatchers' preferred breeding habitat is  pine-oak or coniferous forest , usually near running water .
10  they make a cup nest on a fork in a tree , usually low in a horizontal branch .
11   females usually lay two to five eggs .
12 these birds migrate to mexico for the winter , where the mexican central-southern birds are resident .
13  the non-resident birds are on the western coast from jalisco northwards , and then to inland regions , in a corridor strip on the western flank of the sierra madre occidental .
14 the cordilleran flycatcher waits on an open perch of a shrub or low branch of a tree and flies out to catch insects in flight (hawking), and also sometimes picks insects from foliage while hovering (gleaning) .
15 the song includes notes represented as pseet , ptsick , seet usually sung rapidly together .
16  the ptsick or ptik note has the first syllable higher-pitched than the secondthe only difference from the pacific-slope flycatcher's song (sibley 2000) .
17   the male's typical position call is a loud and distinctive pit pete{citation needed|date=june 2008} or tse-seet , but some give a "rising tsweep" or a "slurred tseeweep , like the calls of pacific-slope flycatchers (sibley 2000) .
