0 the eastern phoebe (sayornis phoebe) is a small passerine bird .
1  this tyrant flycatcher breeds in eastern north america , although its normal range does not include the southeastern coastal united states .
2 it is migratory , wintering in the southernmost united states and central america .
3  it is a very rare vagrant to western europe .
4  this is one of the first birds to return to the breeding grounds in spring and one of the last to leave in the fall .
5  they arrive for breeding in mid-late march , but they return to winter quarters around the same time when other migrant songbirds do , in september and early october; migration times have stayed the same in the last 100 years .
6 [2][3] the increase in trees throughout the great plains during the past century due to fire suppression and tree planting facilitated a western range expansion of the eastern phoebe[4] as well as range expansions of many other species of birds .
7 [5][6][7]this species appears remarkably big-headed , especially if it puffs up the small crest .
8  its plumage is gray-brown above .
9  it has a white throat , dirty gray breast and buffish underparts which become whiter during the breeding season .
10  two indistinct buff bars are present on each wing .
11  its lack of an eye ring and wingbars , and its all dark bill distinguish it from other north american tyrant flycatchers , and it pumps its tail up and down like other phoebes when perching on a branch .
12  the eastern phoebe's call is a sharp chip , and the song , from which it gets its name , is fee-bee .
13 the eastern wood pewee (contopus virens) is extremely similar in appearance .
14  it lacks the buff hue usually present on the lighter parts of the eastern phoebe's plumage , and thus has always clearly defined and contrasting wing-bars .
15  it also does not bob its tail habitually , and appears on the breeding grounds much later though it leaves for winter quarters at about the same time as the eastern phoebe .
16 [3]the breeding habitat of the eastern phoebe is open woodland , farmland and suburbs , often near water .
17  this phoebe is insectivorous , and often perches conspicuously when seeking food items .
18  it also eats fruits and berries in cooler weather .
19 it often nests on human structures such as bridges and buildings .
20  nesting activity may start as early as the first days of april .
21 [2] the nest is an open cup with a mud base and lined with moss and grass , built in crevice in a rock or man-made site; two to six eggs are laid .
22  both parents feed the young and usually raise two broods per year .
23  the eastern phoebe is occasionally host to the nest-parasitic brown-headed cowbird (molothrus ater) .
