The merlin (Falco columbarius) is a small species of falcon from the Northern Hemisphere, with numerous subspecies throughout North America and Eurasia. A bird of prey once known colloquially as a pigeon hawk in North America, the merlin breeds in the northern Holarctic; some migrate to subtropical and northern tropical regions in winter. Males typically have wingspans of 53–58 centimetres (21–23 in), with females being slightly larger. They are swift fliers and skilled hunters who specialize in preying on small birds in the size range of sparrows to quail. The merlin has for centuries been well regarded as a falconry bird. In recent decades merlin populations in North America have been significantly increasing, with some merlins becoming so well adapted to city life that they forgo migration.


Nomenclature

The name "merlin" is derived from Old French esmerillon via Anglo-Norman merilun or meriliun. There are related Germanic words derived through older forms such as Middle Dutch smeerle, Old High German smerle and Old Icelandic smyrill.[2] Wycliffe's Bible, around 1382, mentions An Egle, & agriffyn, & a merlyon.[2] The species was once known as 'pigeon hawk' in North America.[3]

The genus name is Late Latin; falco derives from falx, falcis, a sickle, referring to the claws of the bird.[4] The species name columbarius is Latin for "of doves" from "columba", "dove".[5]

Some regard the North American and Eurasian (F. columbarius) populations as two distinct species. The first modern taxonomist to describe the merlin was Carl Linnaeus, a Swede who reported his type specimen came from America. Thirteen years after Linnaeus's description Marmaduke Tunstall recognized the Eurasian birds as a distinct taxon aesalon in his Ornithologica Britannica. If two species of merlins are recognized, the Old World birds would thus bear the scientific name F. aesalon.[6][7]




Systematics

The relationships of the merlin are not resolved to satisfaction. In size, shape and coloration, it is fairly distinct among living falcons. The red-necked falcon is sometimes considered more closely related to the merlin than other falcons, but this seems to be a coincidence due to similar hunting habits; it could not be confirmed in more recent studies. Indeed, the merlin seems to represent a lineage distinct from other living falcons since at least the Early Pliocene, some 5 Ma (million years ago). As suggested by biogeography and DNA sequence data, it might be part of an ancient non-monophyletic radiation of Falcos from Europe to North America, alongside the ancestors of forms such as the American kestrel (F. sparvierus), and the aplomado falcon (F. femoralis) and its relatives. A relationship with the red-necked falcon (F. chicquera) was once proposed based on their phenetic similarity, but this is not considered likely today.[6][7][8][9][10]
European subspecies aesalon. Adult male (front) and female (behind)

In that regard, it is interesting to note a fossil falcon from the Early Blancan (4.3–4.8 Ma)[11] Rexroad Formation of Kansas. Known from an almost complete right coracoid (specimen UMMP V29107) and some tarsometatarsus, tibiotarsus and humerus pieces (V27159, V57508-V57510, V57513-V57514), this prehistoric falcon was slightly smaller than a merlin and apparently a bit more stout-footed, but otherwise quite similar. It was part of the Fox Canyon and Rexroad Local Fauna's, and may have been the ancestor of the living merlins or its close relative. With its age quite certainly pre-dating the split between the Eurasian and North American merlins, it agrees with the idea of the merlin lineage originating in North America, or rather the colonization thereof. After adapting to its ecological niche, ancient merlins would have spread to Eurasia again, with gene flow being interrupted as the Beringia and Greenland regions became icebound in the Quaternary glaciation.[7][8][12]


Subspecies

That the merlin has a long-standing presence on both sides of the Atlantic is evidenced by the degree of genetic distinctness between Eurasian and North American populations. Arguably, they might be considered distinct species, with gene flow having ceased at least a million years ago, but probably more.[7]

By and large, color variation in either group independently follows Gloger's Rule. The Pacific temperate rain forest subspecies suckleyi's males are almost uniformly black on the upperside and have heavy black blotches on the belly, whereas those of the lightest subspecies, pallidus, have little non-dilute melanin altogether, with grey upperside and reddish underside pattern.[6]
Presumably coastal forest merlin (F. c. suckelyi), Potter Marsh, Anchorage (Alaska, United States)

American group[6]

    Falco columbarius columbarius (Linnaeus, 1758) – taiga merlin, tundra merlin

    Canada and northernmost United States east of Rocky Mountains, except Great Plains. Migratory, winters in S North America, Central America, the Caribbean, and N South America from the Guyanas to the northern Andes foothills. Rarely winters in the northern USA.[3][13]

    Falco columbarius richardsonii (Ridgway, 1871) – prairie merlin

    Great Plains from Alberta to Wyoming. Resident (some winter dispersal).

    Falco columbarius suckleyi (Ridgway, 1873) – coastal forest merlin, black merlin

    Pacific coast of North America, from S Alaska to N Washington state. Resident (some altitudinal movements).

Eurasian group[6]

    Falco columbarius/aesalon aesalon (Tunstall, 1771)

    Northern Eurasia from British Isles through Scandinavia to central Siberia. Population of northern Britain shows evidence of gene flow from subaesalon. British Isles population resident, rest migratory; winters in Europe and the Mediterranean region to about Iran.

Male (presumably F. c./a. pallidus) wintering in Little Rann of Kutch (Gujerat, India)

    Falco columbarius/aesalon subaesalon (C.L. Brehm, 1827) – smyril (Faroese), smyrill (Icelandic)

    Iceland and Faroe Islands. Latter population has some gene flow with aesalon. Resident (some winter dispersal).

    Falco columbarius/aesalon pallidus (Sushkin, 1900)

    Asian steppes between Aral Sea and Altay Mountains. Migratory, winters in S Central Asia and N South Asia.

    Falco columbarius/aesalon insignis (Clark, 1907)

    Siberia between Yenisei and Kolyma Rivers. Migratory, winters in continental East Asia. 
